# CHAPTER I.<br /><small> EGYPT AND PALESTINE.</small>{#one .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Introductory — Choosing a Dragoman — Djebel Mokattam — The Nile Steamer — The Mecca
Caravan — Sail for Syria — A Poor Traveller — Struck by Lightning — Syrian Sloughs and
Storms — The River Kishon — Arrival at Jerusalem — An Idea worked out — ߵVive la Mer
Morte!ߴ — Jericho — We fall among Thieves — The Jordan Valley — Capture of a
Standard-bearer — Ferry of the Jordan.<br /><br />
::::

BEFORE carrying my readers into the primitive wilds of Bashan, and amongst the
unknown valleys and ridges of the Caucasus, I must give some explanation of the
circumstances which induced me to undertake the journey I am about to describe.
In many summer holidays, spent among the Alps, I had acquired a taste for
mountain scenery, and when an opportunity of being absent from home for a longer
time than usual presented itself, I looked for some country where the zest of
novelty would be added to those natural features which chiefly attracted me. For
many reasons the Caucasus seemed to be the very region I was seeking. Less
distant than the Andes or the Himalayas, its mountains were yet unknown to
ordinary travellers, and none of our countrymen had explored the recesses of the
finest portions of the chain, although not a few had crossed the great highway
of the Dariel, or followed in the footsteps of the Russian armies in Daghestan.

My journey was to begin in January, at which time it was obviously too early to
start on a mountaineering excursion, and the ease with which a visit to the
Caucasian provinces might be fitted on to an Eastern tour induced me to spend
the intervening months in Egypt and the Holy Land.

The plan was definitely settled when my friend Mr. Tucker agreed to join me in
the whole of the proposed journey. I had the good fortune to secure a second
comrade for our Caucasian explorations in Mr. Moore, who was, however, unable to
leave London until the summer, and therefore promised to meet us, at Tiflis,
about June 20th. So far our party was complete, but for mountaineering work it
was evidently necessary to have the assistance of at least some skilled guide.
My old companion, Francois Devouassoud of Chamouni, was just the man we wanted,
and he proved not only willing but anxious to join us. The only question was
whether he should meet us at some point in our journey, or should accompany us
from its outset. I finally determined to accede to his wishes, and take him as a
travelling servant, having full confidence in his intelligence and readiness to
accommodate himself to new scenes and unaccustomed modes of life. We had no
reason to repent this decision.

After a busy fortnight, spent in getting together the necessaries for our
journey—which included a tent, waterproof saddlebags, a portable kitchen, and
large quantities of Liebig’s soup—we left England on January 4th, 1868. We
passed through the South of France in the most intense cold: at Avignon the
Rhone was frozen from bank to bank, and the fountains at Marseilles were turned
into masses of icicles. On January 8th we sailed for Egypt, on board the
Messageries Imperiales’ steamer ߵPort Saidߴ with a miscellaneous batch of
passengers, including two French officers who were going to Abyssinia, two
directors of the Suez Canal, Gerome the painter, the Viceroy of Egypt’s dentist,
two missionary ladies bound for Jerusalem, and a party of Algerine Arabs on
their way to Mecca, who lay all day and night on deck, huddled in their cloaks.
With such variety on board, and a constantly-changing horizon, we found the
voyage by no means monotonous.

On the sixth morning the tall lighthouse and low coast of Alexandria came in
sight. We landed in a storm of rain, which added to the difficulties of
newcomers in an Eastern city. We were at once surrounded by a host of dragomen,
and pestered by their persistent attentions, until we at last selected one,
whose personal appearance was in his favour, and whose terms and promises were
more reasonable than those of most of the men we saw. By the kind assistance of
a European resident, a contract was made with him to accompany us during our
Syrian tour; his duties were to begin on our landing at Jaffa or Beyrout. The
successful candidate was Elias Abbas, a Maronite of the Lebanon.

I have no intention of adding to the already too numerous descriptions of Egypt
and the Nile, but I cannot refrain from one hint to all visitors to Cairo. Visit
the petrified forest, and male your donkey-boy bring you back by Djebel
Mokattam, or you will lose one of the most wonderful views in the East. After
riding for miles over the arid African desert, with a narrow horizon, and
nothing to attract the attention save a distant train of camels or a troop of
gazelles, the edge of an abrupt descent is reached, and the view of Cairo and
the valley of the Nile bursts upon the eyes with an almost magical suddenness.
The immediate foreground is formed by the quarried heights of Djebel Mokattam,
in the centre of the picture rise the taper minarets of the mosque of the
citadel, in a valley on its right are the tombs of the Memlooks, a deserted town
of the dead, and the vast modern city spreads itself out in the plain below. In
the centre of the broad bluish-green ribbon of fertile land, dotted with
clusters of pyramids, the Nile itself can be traced to the commencement of the
Delta, while beyond, on the west, the yellow sands of the desert mark the limits
of its fertilising inundation.

At Cairo we were fortunate in falling in with some pleasant Americans, who were
making up a party to hire a steamboat for a trip up the river. They asked us to
join them, and although the Nile had not formed part of our programme, the
opportunity was too good to be lost, and we gladly accepted the offer.

Although our company consisted of eleven Americans and only four Englishmen, the
majority were not at all disposed to abuse their power, and we gave an example
of unbroken harmony to the other steamers going up the river at the same time.
Indeed, I believe that on this account, as well as from our being so fortunate
as to carry with us some pretty and lively Transatlantic cousins, we were an
object of envy and heartburning to most of the boats we met.

Time could not hang heavy on the hands of those who, when their admiration was
no longer called forth by the mysterious type of beauty’ peculiar to the
broken-nosed sisterhood of Sphinxes, could turn their eyes on the fresher charms
which the Far West had sent to compete with the stony loveliness of the East. On
February 14th we bade farewell to the little steamer in which we had spent three
very pleasant weeks on the Nile, and returned to our old quarters in Shepherd’s
Hotel at Cairo.

We witnessed the departure of the Haj caravan for Mecca, admired the holy camel,
draped with cloth of gold, carrying the annually renewed covering of Mahomet’s
tomb, and laughed heartily at a sheikh of extraordinary sanctity and obesity,
who, stripped to the waist and shining with oil, swayed himself backwards and
forwards on his camel with the air of a tipsy Falstaff. A few hours later we
bade adieu to Cairo and our Nile friends, and on the next day embarked at
Alexandria for Syria.

We had been asked to take out from England a long box, labelled ߵDelicate
instruments—with careߴ for the use of Lieutenant Warren, the officer engaged in
superintending the excavations lately undertaken by the ߵPalestine Exploration
Committee.ߴ  On our leaving Alexandria the custom-house officer wanted to examine
the box, and it was only by loud protests and threats of official vengeance that
we saved the instruments from the risk of being spoiled by the Egyptians. This
was the beginning of woes to these ߵdelicate instrumentsߴ which became
celebrated characters with us during the next fortnight.

We spent a day at Port Said, an utterly uninteresting town of third-class villa
residences, and wide streets lined with hastily-run-up stores, built upon a
sandspit. It is probably destined to future importance as the Mediterranean port
of the Suez Canal. We had not time to see much of the works now in progress
there, but enjoyed a ramble on the beach, which is entirely formed of lovely
little shells of the most delicate shapes and colours, We re-embarked on Tuesday
the 17th, and in the evening the sea became very rough. At midnight half the
passengers were pitched out of their berths by some terrible rolls; then the
cabin-benches got loose, and tumbled about noisily. At 7 a.m. we were off Jaffa,
but landing was out of the question; an hour later the cabin in which I was
dressing was filled with a blaze of light, and the ship shook with a report as
if she had fired a broadside. Our foremast had been struck by lightning, but,
being provided with a conductor, the vessel escaped injury, All that day we ran
on through a big tumbling sea, and anchored at night in the roadstead of
Beyrout.

On Wednesday morning we disembarked, and went to the ߵHotel de Damasߵ. Our
original plan, to land at Jaffa and go up direct to Jerusalem, had been thrown
out by the storm, and new arrangements were necessary. Mr. Williams, one of our
American friends, was in the same position, and now agreed to join us in our
Syrian journey, so that we were a party of three. As attendants, besides the
dragoman, Elias Abbas, we had a cook and a waiter, with the usual staff of
muleteers.

Elias’s preparations took him several days, and it was not till Sunday that we
succeeded in leaving Beyrout. Meantime we heard complaints from all sides of the
extraordinary severity of the season; Damascus was virtually inaccessible, owing
to the heavy snowstorms which had blocked up the passes of the Lebanon. The rain
fell almost incessantly, and the mock torrents which poured down the streets of
Beyrout augured ill for our chance of passing the formidable streams which
intersect the road to Jerusalem. At last we set out. We made a long circuit
through the hills to Deir-el-Kamr, to find a bridge over the Damur, the first
and most formidable of the rivers we had to cross. Along the coast of Tyre and
Sidon we journeyed on through rain and mud, until at Acre the tide of our
mishaps reached its highest point. We had pitched our tent beneath a ruined
villa a mile outside the town; about 9 P.M. the wind rose; an hour later it was
blowing a gale, and the ropes began to part; however, by doubling our
fastenings, and by dint of constant sallies, we kept a shelter over our heads
all night. At 5 a.m. the outside roof of the tent was in rags, the wooden
supports of the sides mostly broken, and the wind generally master of the
situation. I was too sleepy to stir out of bed, and lay in momentary expectation
that we should be caught up and carried away in a whirlwind. My friends,
however, did not wish to try this new sensation, so we roused ourselves to
action, and with much difficulty succeeded in lowering and fastening up the
canvas; then we took refuge, with the horses, in a ruinous cellar.

Next morning, just outside Acre, the passage of a river, which entered the sea
by two mouths, rendered necessary a double loading and unloading of the baggage.
We crossed in boats, but our animals had to swim. I shall not easily forget the
transit of the three donkeys. They were driven into the stream as far as whips
would reach them, but just within their depth, and beyond the reach of their
persecutors’ weapons, the trio unanimously halted. Never was the *vis inertia*
more strikingly exemplified. In vain their masters hurled on the patient beasts
every form of Christian and Moslem imprecation. The donkeys were not a penny the
worse’; they felt they had the best of the situation, and exhibited a stolid
contempt for all the uproar of which they were the cause. At last one of the
muleteers stripped, and, entering the water, launched the obstinate little
brutes, one by one, by main force. Once committed to the deep, they swam
bravely, and emerged on the farther bank dripping and shaking their long ears as
if, after all, they were the heroes of the day. An hour’s scamper over the sandy
beach brought us to the mouth of ߵthat ancient river, the river Kishon.ߴ It was,
of course, flooded, and, considering the combination of difficulties caused by a
gale, a sandstorm, helpless ferrymen, and ropes breaking every minute, it was a
wonder that we and our mules were not carried out to sea in a body. Altogether
our baggage was twelve hours in getting over the nine miles of flat ground
between Acre and Caifa.

The weather now changed, and continued fine for our ride down the travel-beaten
track that leads through Nablous to the capital of Palestine. Our only remaining
difficulty was the mud, which made the Plain of Esdraelon almost impassable: now
one mule, now another, stuck in the treacherous quagmire, but the ߵdelicate
instrumentsߴ had been confided to an animal equal to his trust, which either
kept its legs, or sank in the gentlest and most graceful manner. We reached
Jerusalem on February 18th, having been twelve days on the road.

We quartered ourselves in the Damascus Hotel, which is fairly comfortable, and
commands a fine view of the Mosque of Omar and Mount Olivet from the windows of
the *salle-a-manger.* As soon as possible we enquired for Lieutenant Warren,
hoping to deliver to him in person the case of ߵdelicate instrumentsߴ and to
hear how their internal organisation had borne the journey; but he had already
left Jerusalem for the trip to the east side of the Dead Sea, which ended so
sadly in the death of one of his companions, of Jericho fever.

The English Vice-Consul kindly accompanied me when I went to present a letter of
introduction from M. Musurus (the Turkish Ambassador in London) to the local
Pasha, who was most courteous, and promised to do anything in his power for us.
Thus encouraged, we reflected what boon we should ask. We were all somewhat
disappointed with the unadventurous character of a ride through Palestine, so
little realising the common idea of Eastern travel, and were eager to seize the
first favourable opportunity to escape from the beaten track between Jerusalem
and Damascus. When, therefore, the map was produced, and the directness of a
route via Jerash, Bozrah, and the ߵGiant Citiesߴ of Bashan was pointed out, my
proposal to take that course was unanimously adopted. We had read Mr. Tristram’s
most interesting description of Jerash, and we purchased, at Jerusalem, Mr.
Porter’s sensational account of the ruins of the Hauran. We knew, therefore,
something of the country we proposed to visit, and were aware that to pass from
Jerusalem to Damascus by the east side of the Jordan, with all the impedimenta
of a dragoman, was not a matter to be lightly undertaken. Travellers who, like
Mr. Tristram, have of late years visited Jerash and Amman, have almost
invariably paid large sums of money as ߵbacksheeshߴ to the Adwan and other
Bedouin tribes of the Jordan valley; while those who, like Mr. Porter and Mr.
Cyril Graham, have explored the wilds of Bashan have generally been Arabic
scholars, and have travelled with little baggage. We could find no record of any
traveller since Lord Lindsay, in 1837, who had gone through to Damascus by this
route, although several had penetrated eastward from the Jordan valley as far as
Bozrah.

Our dragoman, greatly to his credit, at once entered into and heartily furthered
our plans, although he warned us of a fact we already knew, that an Arab escort
was both an expensive and unsatisfactory luxury. An alternative, however,
suggested itself. During the past year (1867) the Pasha of Damascus had made an
expedition against the Trans-Jordanic Arabs, had thrashed them soundly, and
taken prisoner one of the Adwan Sheikhs, who was now in durance at Nablous, The
Arab power was in consequence somewhat broken, and the re-establishment of
Turkish garrisons at Es-Salt and Bozrah kept the surrounding districts in more
than the nominal subjection they had previously shown to the central authority.

Elias recommended us to have, if possible, nothing to do with the Arabs, but to
ask from the Pasha a sufficient escort of Turkish cavalry to insure our safety.
Just at the right moment he chanced to meet in the bazaars an old acquaintance,
a sergeant of Bashi-Bazouks, Khasim by name. The pair discussed our plans, and
Khasim entreated to be allowed to take us in charge. One morning our future
guardian was brought, by appointment, to be introduced to us, and first
impressions were most favourable. To describe his personal appearance would
require the language of an Eastern story-teller; I can only catalogue his
beauties like a slave-merchant. Khasim stood at least six feet two inches in
height; he had fine features, and was of a fair but sunburnt complexion, with
curly brown hair, and long tawny moustaches, which curled behind his ears. We
fell in love with him at first sight, and were perfectly ready to promise that
we would ask the Pasha to grant him leave to accompany us.

An opportunity of making the request offered before we expected it. We were
sitting in the *salle-a-manger,* discussing our plans, when we suddenly observed
a commotion in the street below. In another minute the master of the house
dashed upstairs, in breathless haste, and announced His Excellency the Pasha,´
who had come, attended by fifteen soldiers and six attendants, to return our
visit. Unprepared for such an honour, we received him as well as we could, but
it was not easy to get the coffee and sweets proper for the occasion on the spur
of the moment. Nothing could exceed the Pasha’s politeness; he accorded us any
guard we might choose, and promised us letters to the commanders of the
garrisons at Es-Salt and Bozrah.

We now definitely concluded our arrangements, and secured the escort of Khasim,
who was to bring with him a second soldier: these two formed our guard to
Es-Salt, where the officer in command would, we were told, give us further
protection, if necessary.

For the last day or two of our stay at Jerusalem, we were the objects of much
misplaced pity and well-meant advice. Certain undeniable facts were thrust down
our throats at every public meal. We were reminded that Lieuntenant Warren was
at that moment paying the Adwan for permission to travel on the east side of the
Jordan, we were treated to all the details of the bargain then being made, at
the rival hotel, between Goblan, the young Sheikh of the Adwans, and two
American gentlemen, who were anxious to visit Jerash, and all the threats which
the former had uttered, on being told that some Englishmen meant to pass through
his territory without paying blackmail, were repeated for our benefit.

Despite all this, we managed to keep up our spirits, and even to find a
companion who was ready to share our luck, in Mr. Cross, an old Oxford
acquaintance, who made a most welcome addition to our party. On Thursday, March
12th, we defiled, an imposing train, through the narrow streets of
Jerusalem—Cross, Williams, and the dragoman armed with double-barrelled guns,
Tucker and I with revolvers, and the two Turkish irregulars bristling with a
whole armoury of guns, swords, and pistols. We rode over to Bethlehem, to my
mind one of the most satisfactory of the ߵholy placesߴ of Palestine, despite the
crowds of pert children, who, fearless of another Herod, demand ߵbacksheesh’
with Egyptian pertinacity. As we rode on over the bare hills to the Convent of
Marsaba, the beauty of the first view of the Dead Sea so roused Francois’
enthusiasm that, with somewhat Irish brilliancy, he exclaimed, ߵVive la Mer
Morteߴ We slept in the convent.

Friday was a gloriously fine but very hot day. No one can fail to be struck by
the views of the bright blue lake surrounded by red and yellow rocks, and the
wastes of sand, every now and then relieved by strips of verdure. Some of the
party, of course, bathed in the Dead Sea, and we lunched at the ford of the
Jordan, which had as little the appearance of a ford as possible. A turbid
stream three feet deep was pouring round the tree, under the shelter of which
travellers generally make their midday halt. A hot ride, across a plain covered
with brushwood, brought us to the modern Jericho. In the course of the evening a
troop of villagers, men and women, came to dance before us; the women exhibited
first, then the men, but the performances were very similar—a perpetual swinging
of the body and clapping of hands, accompanied by a monotonous chaunt of ߵIwa
backsheesh O Howadjiߴ The people of Jericho bear a very ill name, and we took
the precaution to station Francois at the door of the second tent, to prevent
robbery. While he was keeping a look-out in front, some rascal, peering through
the opening at the back, where the sides of the tent join, saw Cross’s watch
lying on the bed close by, put his arm through, and abstracted it. Fortunately,
the Sheikh of Jericho, Mahmoud, had been ordered by the Pasha to send two of his
men with us from Jerusalem, as a pledge of his protection during our journey
through his territory. The Sheikh’s brothers were now in the village; their
responsibility, therefore, was clearly fixed, and we sent off news of our loss
next morning to the English Consul and the Pasha, by the dragoman of a Scotch
party who were encamped near us on their way back to Jerusalem. In justice to
the Turkish authorities, I must narrate the result of our letters. So effectual
a pressure was put on the Sheikh, that he was compelled to disgorge his prey,
and on our arrival (five weeks later) at Beyrout, we found the watch awaiting
us.

Our ride on Saturday led us off the beaten track of eastern travel. We passed
the mounds supposed to mark the site of Herodian Jericho, which a body of
Lieutenant Warren’s workpeople were employed in excavating. Their labour, as we
heard afterwards, was attended with but trifling results.

Our track skirted the face of the hills on the west side of the Jordan
valley—now crossing low spurs, now passing through flowery dells. After
traversing a wide plain we approached the base of a bold hill, which in form
reminded me of Snowdon; its sides were clothed in verdure of the most vivid
green. By the roadside were seated a group of twenty Bedouins armed only with
clubs. To our intense surprise, Khasim dashed in amongst them, and pounced on
one ragged old fellow. The man selected endeavoured, in vain, to kiss his
captor’s hand and soften his heart; in minute his ߵkefiyehߴ was plucked off his
head, and his hands were tied with it behind his back. Khasim then galloped off
in pursuit of the rest of the party, who had scattered in all directions; he
soon returned with a second prisoner, and we rode on, driving the two men before
us.

We were naturally anxious for an explanation of the scene, but it was some time
before we could come to a clear understanding of the facts of the case. We
gathered at last the following particulars. In the war last year the Turks took
away their arms from some of the Adwan, and strictly forbad them to appear on
the west bank of the Jordan. The party we had come upon were thus on forbidden
ground, and were doubtless on the look-out for some defenceless donkey-rider
going down to Jericho, whom they might rob. The old gentleman first seized had
been the standard-bearer of the tribe during the war, and was a well-known
reprobate. After driving our prisoners for several miles, as a warning to them
not to be again found on the road, we, reflecting that the men might be an
awkward encumbrance on the other side of the river, interceded for them with
their captor; the Bedouins were liberated, and, having sufficiently demonstrated
their gratitude to us by repeatedly kissing our boots, made off in the direction
taken by their companions.

The ford of the Jordan we were now approaching is on the direct road from
Nablous to Es-Salt, and is guarded by a few Turkish soldiers, who keep in repair
the old ferryboat, which has been stationed here to maintain the communication
of the outlying garrison at Es-Salt with the rest of Palestine. The river flows
in a deep trench, a quarter to half a mile broad, and at least 200 feet below
the level of the rest of the valley. At the foot of the sharp descent, on a
knoll overlooking the turbid stream, we found the tents of the American
gentlemen, who, like ourselves, had made up their minds to visit the east side
of the Jordan. They had contracted with young Goblan to provide an Arab escort
for thirty napoleons—a moderate sum compared with those paid to his father by
former travellers. The old Sheikh of the Adwan had, however, failed to appear,
according to the contract, to ratify his son’s bargain, and our acquaintances
naturally hesitated to cross the river without him.

It was still early in the afternoon, and we ordered our baggage forward to cross
at once, while we spent a pleasant half-hour in the tent of the Americans. They
were most luxuriously provided for by their dragoman, a young and inexperienced
man, who seemed somewhat terrified at the prospect of carrying his elaborate
*batterie de cuisine* among the Arabs.

The transit was, as usual, a long business, and was made really troublesome by
the swollen state of the river, which had lately overflowed its banks and cut
off the ferry-boat from the shore by creating between them several yards of mire
and water, across which we and all our luggage were carried on men’s backs.
Francois was a heavy load; his porter was not up to the work, and the unlucky
burden was deposited in the thickest of the mire. He however, as usual, was not
at a loss for consolation, and prided himself on being the only one of the party
who had fulfilled the duties of a pilgrim by immersion in the Jordan.

:::