# CHAPTER II.<br /><small> BASHAN.</small>{#two .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The English Soldier— A Mountain Ride — Es-Salt — Lost on the Hills — The Jabbok
— Camp of the Beni-Hassan— Suppressing a Sheikh — The Oak Forests of Gilead —
The Tablelands — An Uxorious Sheikh — Derat — The Roman Road — The Robbers
repulsed — Ghusam — Bozrah — Honoured Guests — A Ramble in the Ruins —Kureiyeh—
Patriarchal Hospitality — Hebran — A Stone House — Kufr— Ascent of El-Kleib —
Suweideh — Kunawat — Noble Ruins — Shuhba — Hades on Earth — Visiting
Extraordinary — The Lejuh — A Lava Flood—Ahireh — Khubab — A Rush to Arms — The
Stolen Mule — A Village in Pursuit — Mismiyeh — The ❛Giant Cities❜ are Roman
Towns — The Wrath of the Beys — A Friendly Sulut — Kesweh — Entrance to
Damascus.<br /><br />
::::

OUR tents were pitched, close to the river, in a picturesque situation on the
eastern bank. In this our first camp beyond Jordan, we felt, if not all the
emotions so eloquently described by the author of ❛Eöthen❜ on finding himself in
the Arab territory, at least a pleasant sensation of having escaped from the
everyday track of travel, and of being on the edge of a fresh and unspoilt
country.

During the evening our dragoman was exposed to the tender solicitations of
Goblan junior (or ❛young Gobbler,❜ as Williams preferred to call him), who had,
when at Jerusalem, declared that we might cross the Jordan, but that our coming
back again was a different matter. He was now perfectly civil, but represented
that we were robbing his tribe of their prescriptive dues, by refusing the
escort they would be happy to furnish, and that any harm which might happen to
us would be on our own heads. Our minds, however, were already made up, and we
turned a deaf ear to his arguments.

:::: { .wrap-80 .caption .break-before}
![&nbsp;](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0016.jpg ""){#b016}
::::

*March 15th.* — Early in the morning Sergeant Birtles, a bronzed English
soldier, the aide-de-camp of Lieutenant Warren, rode into our camp, having
travelled all night from Nimrin, where the exploring party was detained by the
illness of one of their number. Sergeant Birtles had ridden twice within the
week to Jerusalem and back, to procure a nurse and necessaries for the invalid.
He was entirely alone, and seemed thoroughly to despise the dangers of the road,
as he had proved on the first occasion, by returning with a sister of mercy
under his sole charge.

The Sergeant had been up to Jerash with Lieutenant Warren some months
previously, and gave us friendly warning against the Sheikh of Suf and his men,
who while with them had begun to show off their pranks, and had required to be
checked by a display of revolvers. These were the same villains who plundered
Mr. Tristram in 1864. After half-an-hour’s talk with us, Sergeant Birtles
crossed the river, hoping by hard riding to reach Jerusalem the same night. We
also mounted our horses, but our train was scarcely in motion, when two of the
mules stuck in a swamp, and had to be unloaded. A wellmarked track led from the
ferry to the foot of the bluffs which bound the river-bed. Tucker and Williams
galloped on ahead, a proceeding which called forth a remonstrance from Khasim,
who insisted that, on this side of the river, it was unsafe to divide the party.
A short climb through a curious, apparently waterworn, ravine brought us on to
the plain, where we met two picturesque wayfarers — a handsomely-dressed Arab
with a servant in attendance, both bearing long spears. They returned our
greeting with a contemptuous scowl. A little further on, we received an
enthusiastic ❛bonjour❜ from a Turkish lieutenant on leave from Es-Salt, who was
not a little pleased to display his slight knowledge of French. 

Our track turned southward, along the opposite side of the valley to that which
we had ridden up the previous day. The ground was bright with scarlet anemones,
which tinted the hillsides a mile off; other wild flowers grew in almost equal
profusion, although they did not produce such a striking distant effect.

At last we turned sharply to the left, and began to climb, by steep zigzags, the
bare hillside. At every corner of the road we extended our horizon; the higher
ranges of Central Palestine rose behind the hills which dominate the Jordan
valley, and the Dead Sea came into view in the south. After a considerable
ascent the path entered a glen, and wound round the hillsides at some height
above the dry torrent-bed. During our midday halt our sportsmen went off in
pursuit of partridges, but came back empty-handed. On reaching the head of the
glen, we faced more zigzags, up which the laden mules climbed laboriously; they
led us to a high brow, projecting from the main range, which commanded the
finest view we had seen in Syria. We overlooked the whole Jordan valley from the
Lake of Tiberias to the Dead Sea. A corner only of the former was visible, but
we could see the whole basin of the great salt lake, and trace out the long
peninsula of El-Lisan, with the faroff southern shore beyond it, through the
heat-haze which always rests on these strange waters.

The hillsides became more broken, and the dwarf oaks which clothed them added to
their picturesque features. Circling round to the south of the highest portion
of Jebel-Jilad, we crossed two of its spurs with scarcely any fall in the road
between them. From the second ridge a short but sharp descent led to Es-Salt,
the ancient Ramoth-Gilead. The town is built in a nook among the hills, on steep
sun-baked slopes, uglily picturesque, if one may use such a phrase. We found a
pleasant camping-ground on a grassy ledge of the slope opposite the town.

Our starting-point in the morning had been more than 1,000 feet below the
sea-level, and the ridge we had crossed is 3,676 feet above it, so that we had
made an actual ascent of 4,676 feet from the Jordan valley to the pass.

After a short rest we walked over to the opposite hill, to call on the Bimbashi
(Colonel) in command of the garrison, who received us in his tent with great
politeness. He said there was no difficulty in our going to Bozrah; that if we
liked we might have a company of horse, but that he should be quite content to
send his own wives under the escort of the two men we had with us. He pressed us
to stay at Es-Salt a day or two, which we declined, and withdrew after a
somewhat lengthy interview. All our conversation had to pass through two
interpreters, being translated by Elias into Arabic, and into Turkish by a
servant of the commander. The latter process was doubtless unnecessary; but the
Bimbashi’s dignity would have suffered, in Oriental estimation, had he not had
his own interpreter.

On our return we found the camp in commotion. Cross was the only member of the
party who strove to keep up an irreproachable exterior in the wilderness; he
generally rode in a somewhat sporting costume, crowned by a white turban, the
construction of which cost Elias much time and anxiety every morning. On the
present occasion Cross had entrusted his greatcoat to Elias in the morning; the
latter ignorant or careless of the respect due to a garment better fitted for
Pall Mall than Palestine, had stuffed it into a saddlebag, whence emerged,
naturally sadly creased. We found its owner severely reprimanding the
carelessness of the dragoman; but the effect of the rebuke was rather lessened
by the untimely mirth excited in Williams by the forlorn appearance of the once
shapely coat. 

In the course of the evening the Bimbashi sent us a sheep. 

*March 16th.* — We broke up camp early, and rode down the glen under the town,
through a ruinous street, passing tombs and some broken columns below the modern
houses; the bottom of the glen was well irrigated and cultivated. We soon turned
up a lateral ravine, opening on the left, and followed it nearly to its head,
through scenery which was quite savage for this part of Syria. Big boulders lay
about, and a stream foamed and brawled amongst them. A steep climb led us up to
a broad grassy tableland, forming the southern watershed of the Jabbok valley.
We came occasionally on circular ponds, exactly like those to be seen on the
South Downs, of which the scenery constantly reminded us. The road was
continually up or down-hill, till we left on the right the track to Amman, and
sweeping round a brow to the north, gradually descended into a broad oval basin,
environed by hills the greater part sown with corn, although no village or
inhabitants were visible. The drainage of this curious hollow, which is called
by the natives El-Bukaah, or the Little Plain, finds its way through a narrow
opening to the Jabbok. 

Having passed a ruin, apparently that of a small building, surrounded by a
courtyard, we traversed the whole length of the basin (about eight miles), and
mounted the ridge dividing it from the Jabbok valley. The country now became
more wooded, the principal tree being the dwarf evergreen oak. We sat down to
lunch, on a spot commanding a lovely view northwards, over a broken and
richly-wooded landscape, in the centre of which, in an upland plain, on the
further side of the Jabbok valley, we could distinguish the golden-coloured
columns of the great temple at Jerash. In the foreground were some picturesque
peasants, natives of Es-Salt, engaged in ploughing the ground with the most
primitive of agricultural instruments. We rode on in a north-easterly direction,
across an undulating country; from the position of the Jabbok valley, I fancied
we must be going too far east; Elias, however, turned a deaf ear to my
remonstrances, and went off in futile pursuit of some partridges. The baggage
mules lingered, and for some time our cavalcade was separated into three
detachments, each of which had, more or less, lost its way. A good deal of time,
and much temper, was expended before we rejoined our scattered forces, but
luckily no foes were at hand to profit by such bad generalship. The glen through
which the Jabbok flows is narrow, steep-sided, and not accessible at all points
for laden beasts. As we descended the slopes, we passed many prostrate columns
and blocks of marble, the relics of some town unknown to fame.

Before making the final descent to the stream, Elias and I trotted off to
reconnoitre the country, and look for a good camping-ground. The day was already
far spent, and we were not best pleased to discover that the grassy plain we had
previously fixed upon as our halting-place, at the junction with the Jabbok of a
northern afluent, was occupied by an Arab encampment. We determined,
notwithstanding, to put a bold face on the situation, and adhere to our original
plan. We were too near to escape the notice of the Arabs, and the best course
was to show that we were not afraid of them. We crossed the Jabbok, a clear
trout-stream hidden in a dense thicket of oleanders, and rode down its right
bank half a mile to the plain. Halting on its verge, we began to unload our
mules, while Khasim went off on an embassy to the Sheikh’s tent, conspicuous
amongst the rest by its size. The fear of European weapons, and the unknown
force of government at our back, joined to the Oriental dislike to attack
strangers who have assumed the character of guests, overcame even the
covetousness of a needy horde of Bedouins, and a deputation soon returned
Khasim’s visit, bringing as presents some milk and a lamb. For the latter it was
afterwards suggested payment would be acceptable.

Our hosts turned out to be of the Beni-Hassan tribe — one formerly of great
power, but now down in the world. Their encampment consisted of thirty-five long
black tents, each holding about ten men, besides women and children. It was
already evening, and the flocks were being gathered in; tall camels strolled
listlessly about, cows placidly awaited their milking-time, sheep and goats
hustled one another down the slopes, wiry little horses grazed, or were
picketed, near the tents, and an odd donkey or two brayed a fussy welcome to his
brothers in our train, who were not slow to return the greeting.

While our dinner was preparing, we were surrounded by the most ill-favoured
crowd I ever saw. The villanous expression of countenance common to almost all
the men reminded me of the Sepoy faces, as they were drawn in the illustrated
papers, at the time of the Indian Mutiny. The Bedouin dress, the long burnous,
and kefiyeh or scarf round the head, though picturesque, did not lessen the
savage aspect of the assemblage. All our small belongings were objects of
perpetual wonder — in particular, Williams’s carved pipe and Cross’s kid gloves.
Never before had the Beni-Hassan seen a man with such a peculiar skin, or one so
readily put on and off. The revolvers, which appeared to go off for ever, came
in for their due share of admiration and awe. We had some difficulty in keeping
the tents clear, but it was necessary to draw a line somewhere, and we sternly
refused admission to any but the two chiefs. The sheep was cooked entire, and
our muleteers, with a select circle of Beni-Hassan, kept up the feast round the
camp-fire till a late hour.

*March 17th* — The night passed peaceably. At breakfast a stork was brought in
which Williams had wounded by a long shot the night before. The poor bird’s wing
was broken, and he hopped about, pursued by the Arab urchins, in a way that was
both ludicrous and painful. Elias had been sharply reprimanded for his
wanderings on the previous day, and warned that this kind of thing must not be
repeated; he now came with pride to tell us that he had arranged with one of the
Beni-Hassan to conduct us to Jerash. He took great credit for his choice,
having, as he said, secured the greatest robber in the tribe. There was wisdom
in this odd recommendation, as the man who had stolen most sheep was, by
implication, he who best knew the roads and bye-paths to the neighbouring
villages.

Our guide led us up a dell separated by an intervening ridge from the stream
which entered the Jabbok close to our encampment. The country was green and
wellwooded, and the soil was free from the detestable crop of stones which
Palestine everywhere produces. As we climbed out of the deep valley, the ridges
of Jebel Ajlun appeared behind the round top of a lower hill, Neby Hut, crowned
by the white tomb of some Moslem saint. Another deep and rugged hollow, the edge
of which we skirted, lay beneath us on the left. The landscape reminded me much
of some of the finer parts of South Wales, but its beauty was marred by the low
clouds which scudded across the sky, and promised us a wetting before long. Near
a beautiful fountain, encased in broken masonry, and ornamented with rich
evergreen shrubs, the source of the before-mentioned stream, we passed some
ruins too dilapidated for our unskilled eyes to make anything out of them. They
seemed, for the most part, to be the remains of small houses built against the
rocks, with caves at their back, which had served for cellars or storehouses. We
rode up a succession of picturesque glades, opening one out of another, till we
reached a ridge north-east of the tomb-crowned hill, and suddenly saw beneath
us, close at hand, the columns of Jerash.

The scene was very striking: before us were the remains of a noble Roman town,
its ruined walls four miles in circumference, not only traceable, but in places
almost intact; its public buildings still so perfect that, looking round, one
could say, ❛Here is the theatre, there the circus, there the baths, there the
colonnaded High Street, there the later Christian cathedrals❜; for it was only
after three hundred years of Christian civilisation that the Arabs laid waste
the city. The fertile land around is still as capable as ever of cultivation;
but a long period of insecurity to life and property has been the ruin of Syria,
and now not a single inhabitant is to be found within the circuit of the ancient
Gerasa.

We rode through the walls near their south-eastern angle, and, passing the
massive ruin of a bath, crossed the oleander-fringed brook which runs through
the centre of the deserted city. A very convenient site was selected for our
camp, in the vaulted chamber of a second bath, where the tents were sheltered
from the thick drizzle which had begun to fall. After an early lunch we set out
to explore the ruins, which are fully described by Mr. Tristram, and in Murray’s
❛Handbook to Syria.❜ We went first to the magnificent Temple of the Sun, the
remaining columns of which, standing on elevated ground facing the east, are
conspicuous in all distant views of the city. Near them, in the side of the
hill, is the largest theatre. Returning to the great street, we stopped to
admire the exquisite carving of a richly-decorated gateway, and then proceeded
to the ❛Forum,❜ an oval space surrounded with columns. On the brow above it, near
the southern gate of the city, stand another temple and theatre. The latter is
wonderfully little injured by time; the stage is almost perfect, and very
tastefully decorated. When will some photographer carry his camera across the
Jordan, and reap the rich, and as yet almost untouched, field which awaits him
amidst the ruins of Ammén, Jerash, and the Hauran?

Outside the town, on the top of the ascent from the Jabbok valley, stands a fine
though florid triumphal arch, between which and the city is a circus. We went
down to the banks of the brook in search of game, and then, retracing our steps,
found a pretty waterfall, and the remains of an ancient mill. Having re-entered
the town, we crossed to the eastern quarter by a fine bridge of three arches,
and explored its comparatively unimportant ruins.

In the course of the evening we had a visitor. We were engaged in a rubber of
whist, when Elias came in and announced that the Sheikh of a neighbouring
village requested the honour of an interview. We enquired his name, and
simultaneously burst out laughing when told it was the Sheikh of Suf, of whose
iniquities we had been reading Mr. Tristram’s account not ten minutes before. We
declined to see him, but agreed to look over his testimonials. They extend over
thirty years, and are probably unique. One Englishman writes thus: — ❛On no
account have anything to do with the bearer of this; he is a thorough villain
and awful liar.❜  The other writers are more guarded in their language, but they
all give, in effect, the same advice. After amusing ourselves by a thorough
inspection of the documents, we returned them with a message, ❛that the Sheikh
of Suf’s character was already too well known among Englishmen to require to be
supported by testimonials; that for ourselves we were travelling under the
protection of the Government, as he could see by our being accompanied by a
Bashi-Bazouk; and that if he had a commission from the Pasha to escort us, it
was well — otherwise we must decline his services.❜  On the receipt of this
message the Sheikh grew angry and violent, and attempted to force an entrance
through the archway of the baths to our tent. This was blocked, except in one
place, by stones, and Khasim, who had stationed himself in the gap, put a stop
to the Sheikh’s proceedings by seizing him by the beard, and waggling his head
with one hand while he boxed his ears with the other. After this, Yusuf and his
followers rode off, not unnaturally in a huff; while Elias shouted after him,
that as he had chosen to come over, we should hold him personally responsible if
anything was stolen in the night.

To avoid any such misfortune, the mules and horses were picketed in a ruined
chamber close by. We could not help speculating on the chance of old Yusuf
seeking revenge, and congratulated ourselves on the strength of our position,
which was protected on all sides by broken masses of wall. The night passed
quietly, except for an alarm caused by my jumping out of bed with the idea that
I had been hit over the head. When a light was procured, and it was discovered
that one of the wooden poles, used to stiffen the sides of the tent, had
suddenly flapped inwards and fallen across my face, I was roundly abused by my
companions for so needlessly disturbing their slumbers.

*March 18th.* — To our great delight the morning was fine, for we dreaded a
repetition of the weather from which we had suffered on first landing at
Beyrout. We had wished to strike across as directly as possible from Jerash to
Bozrah, passing through Um-el-Jemal, where there are extensive ruins, which were
visited by Mr. Cyril Graham. Our Beni-Hassan guide, however, seemed unacquainted
with this road, and threw obstacles in the way of its adoption, declaring it to
be ❛desert.❜  and infested at the present moment by Beni-Sakhr. We agreed,
finally, to take a more northerly but somewhat circuitous route, by Er-Remtheh
and Derat.

We were on the point of starting, when four horsemen from Suf rode up; the
Sheikh was not amongst them. The newcomers told Elias they were going to act as
our escort; he, by our instructions, replied, that if they came with us at all,
they would come as far as Damascus, and there be handed over to the tender
mercies of the Pasha. This prospect was too much for them, and they soon rode
off, to be seen no more. We had been careful to leave the men of Suf to suppose
that we should follow the route taken by Mr. Tristram to the Lake of Tiberias;
and if the Sheikh and his friends were prepared to do us any mischief, they
probably lay in wait on that road. We set out in the opposite direction, our
course being at first nearly due east. From the slopes behind Jerash we had a
most beautiful view of its columns. We noticed the ruins of a small temple
situated a mile higher up the valley, and passed several fine sarcophagi, lying
overturned and empty amongst the trees.

For some distance we rode through open glades, where the Roman road was
constantly visible, running parallel to the more erratic tracks of modern
travellers. When we began to ascend the side of Jebel Kafkafka, the scenery
became most picturesque; grey crags jutted out from the hillside, the forest
trees grew larger, and the foliage, although evergreen oaks and firs
predominated, was more varied. The narrow glade by which we climbed the hill
wound every moment between rocks, and branches of trees overarched and shut in
the vista. Our long cavalcade lent life to the scene, which was a complete
realisation of one of Salvator Rosa’s pictures. It was impossible not to remark
what an admirable place this would have been for an ambuscade, if the men of Suf
had had the pluck to waylay us; but beyond a solitary shepherd and his flock, we
saw no living creatures except eagles and partridges. The sportsmen of the party
knocked over several of the latter. In the wood the canteen mule, who was
subject to fits of obstinacy, charged a tree and upset his load. Five minutes
after this incident we reached the top of the pass, the height of which must be
considerable, as we overlooked Jebel Osha and the other hills round Es-Salt. The
view in this direction was fine; the depths of the Jordan valley were hidden,
but we easily recognised the hills round Nablous and Jerusalem. In the east,
lower wooded ranges shut out all distant view. Grass rides, at right-angles to
the track we were following, branched off constantly through openings in the
forest; following one of them, we descended into the Wady Warran, a long and
tortuous valley, the sides of which are clothed with park-like timber, in some
instances of very large size. The landscape was entirely unlike ordinary Syrian
scenery, and we could constantly have fancied ourselves in the wilder part of an
English park, but for the absence of running water in the bed of the winter
torrent, which, even at this early season, contained only occasional pools. As
we advanced, the hills become lower and less wooded, until we at last emerged
upon a vast undulating plain, the nearer part green grassland, the more distant,
rich brown loam, recently ploughed. The afternoon was hot and hazy, and from
time to time fine mirage effects were produced by the state of the atmosphere.
Er-Remtheh, the only village in sight, was a long way off, but was conspicuous
from its position on a spur projecting from the low range of Ez-Zumleh which
bounded the north-eastern horizon. On entering the plain, our Beni-Hassan guide
requested to be allowed to return; he had committed some robberies lately in the
district we were entering, and was afraid to be caught there. We gave him eleven
francs for his services, and let him go.

Soon after he left, a long train of camels met us, laden with black basalt
millstones, which seem to be the principal manufacture and, except corn, the
only export of the Hauran.

After leaving behind Jebel Kafkafka, the country was quite bare. With our goal
full in sight, we pushed on rapidly, and brought a long but fast day’s ride to a
conclusion in capital time. Mr. Porter says that the dwellers on the Haj road
(the route of the yearly caravan from Damascus to Mecea) are remarkable for
their fanatical hostility to Europeans; we felt, therefore, some doubts as to
what the character of our reception would be. A meadow north of the village, and
near the pond which supplied the only water in the neighbourhood,^[^0200]^ was
selected for our camping ground. After our tents were pitched, two of the party,
finding that the people appeared a remarkably mild and inoffensive though
inquisitive race, walked off to explore the village. It was of the usual ruinous
character, and we found nothing of any interest, except the base of a black
basalt column. At a distance of about five miles to the north-west, the ruins of
a large village were conspicuous on the plain. In the evening the Sheikh of the
place, a good-looking merry old gentleman, visited us in our tent. Strange to
say, he refused a pipe, on the ground that his three wives would not let him
smoke. With an absence of the usual Oriental reserve, he entered into some
amusing details of his domestic arrangements. His wives had each of them, he
said, cost him 35,000 piastres; his last acquisition was the dearest of the
three, and he was contemplating adding a fourth (the full number allowed to
orthodox Mussulmen), still dearer. All these ❛dear things,❜  together, appeared
to be somewhat too much for the old gentleman, and he seemed relieved to escape
from home and chat with us, even though his fears of being accused of smelling
of smoke prevented the enjoyment of a pipe.

We asked when he had last seen European travellers. The Sheikh replied that,
three years before, a party, including some ladies, had passed, on the way to
Damascus, by the direct road through Mezarib, the residence of the Turkish
governor of the Hauran.

During the night our second Turkish soldier, who had been left behind at
Es-Salt, and had ridden on to Amman instead of Jerash, came into camp. He was
horribly afraid of our anger at his involuntary desertion, and was in an abject
state of contrition.

*March 19th.* — Before we started, a caravan of 400 camels, laden with corn for
shipment at Acre, passed by. It struck us as curious, that a land described, by
the latest authority, as ❛utterly desolate,❜ should be able not only to feed its
inhabitants, but to send away such quantities of grain. What we saw later in the
day explained the mystery, and proved how far preconceived ideas may lead a
writer into misrepresentation. It was interesting to watch the long train
defiling endlessly over the dewy plain. The camels were attached, head to tail,
in batches of about twenty each, headed by their drivers; and lively little
donkeys, bestridden by boys, trotted alongside the great solemn beasts. As the
sun rose the mists rolled away, and before we started, the long snowy ridge of
Hermon stood out bright and clear against the blue sky. It looked very imposing,
though at a distance of at least fifty miles.

Our track led in a north-easterly direction, over a chain of low hills, where we
encountered another train of laden camels, and in a short two hours from
Er-Remtheh, we approached Derat, a large inhabited village of black basalt
houses, each surrounded by a high wall — the lower six feet of solid masonry,
the upper part built of loosely-piled stones. Dead animals — dogs, horses, and
mules — lay about the streets in every stage of decomposition, offending equally
the senses of sight and smell.

The principal ruin at Derat is that of a Christian church. A large quadrangle,
surrounded by cloisters, leads into a low-roofed edifice supported by numerous
columns. Architecture there is none, but the building is quite a museum of
capitals stolen from older edifices. Derat is a good specimen of the modern
architecture of the Hauran. The houses are mere piles of ruins. Having passed,
perhaps by a stone door, through the high outer wall, you find yourself in a
small open space, whence steps lead downwards into sundry burrows, half
excavated in the earth, half built up and roofed in with unhewn stones. Anything
more sombre and unhomelike than these piles of black basalt boulders it is
impossible to conceive. It would be too ridiculous to imagine the sentiment of
❛Home, sweet home !❜ entering into the head of an inhabitant of Derat, and most
of the villages of Bashan are similar to it. The town stands above a deep
ravine, at the bottom of which flows the Yarmuk, the ancient Hieromax, which we
crossed by a ford close to the river-side, where we found two fine sarcophagi,
one ornamented with a human bust, the other with lion’s heads. A little above
the ford the Hieromax is crossed by a Roman aqueduct, which, spanning the ravine
by a very bold bridge, is carried at least eighty feet above the water. Our
course now lay almost in a direct line east, across a great plain; on the
further side rose the group of Jebel Hauran, with the conical peak of El-Kleik
conspicuous in their midst, and the castled crag of Salkhat ona southern spur.
We followed exactly in the line of the old Roman road, the pavement of which was
in places intact. After passing the ruins of Gharz, where we failed to discover
anything remarkable, we rode on through cultivated land, dotted at intervals by
black villages. Presently ten horsemen appeared in the distance; suspecting
their character, we at once fell back on the baggage. The Bedouins advanced,
then split into two bodies, and wheeled round on either flank of our party;
after an interval of apparent indecision, they again united their forces. By
this time we were within 300 yards of them, and could judge from their demeanour
that they were out on no lawful errand. Khasim rode forward to meet them, when
one of the party (apparently the chief) saluted him, and they held a parley
together in high tones. As they rode alongside, we admired the skill with which
Khasim made his horse dance round the other, constantly keeping his rifle
pointed in the face of the Bedouin chief. After a few minutes’ conversation,
Khasim rode back to us, while the Arabs wheeled round and scampered away. We
found out that they were ❛Saba❜ a branch of the great Anazeh tribe. The gist
their parley with Khasim was, that they requested him and his soldier to stand
by while we were plundered — an offer which brought dewn on them such indignant
menaces from our men, that having reckoned our force, and seen that, though
superior in numbers, they were far inferior in weapons, they deemed it prudent
to let us go our way in peace.

We recrossed to the left bank of the river by a Roman bridge in good
preservation. The country was now more undulating, and exceedingly
well-cultivated, great pains having been expended in irrigating the soil
thoroughly, by means of a complicated system of water-channels. We had some
difficulty in persuading our men to push on to Ghusam. Mohammed, the second
Bashi-Bazouk, was anxious to turn off the road to some village with which he was
acquainted; but we persisted in riding on, and in course of time Ghusam
appeared, though not in the position assigned to it on Van de Velde’s map. The
view from our camping-ground was magnificent. We were in the centre of a vast
plain, bounded on the west and north by the mountains of Gilead and Hermon, on
the east by the Jebel Hauran, and stretching on the south into the ❜vasty wilds❜
of Arabia. In the distance the black walls of Bozrah glittered in the evening
sunshine, like some enchanted city of the ❜Arabian Nights.❜  In our walk round
the place, we noticed the remains of a Christian church, with the cross carved
on the walls, some reservoirs, and an old stone house, answering better than
anything we had yet seen to Mr. Porter’s descriptions. A fine pair of folding
stone doors, which were thrown wide open at our approach, gave access to the
Sheikh’s courtyard, into the walls of which were built well-executed carvings of
a vine and grapes, the common Christian emblems. On a raised terrace we found
carpets and coffee prepared for us; the conversation consisted chiefly of an
interchange of the usual laborious compliments, but in the course of it we
learnt that the marauding party we had met on the march had stolen two hundred
sheep from the next village. The scoundrels must have been sorely grieved when
they found that ❜very strong man❜  Khasim and twenty-five barrels interposed
between them and the luggage of the Giaour. On our return the Sheikh posted a
guard round our tents, and sent us a lamb. It was an uncommonly pretty little
animal, and Cross was so overcome by its winning ways that he got up in the
night and let it loose; but his kindness was useless, for the lamb was found in
the next field in the morning, and was ruthlessly despatched and made into
cutlets by Mohammed the cook.

*March 20th.* — This morning we had a long argument with Elias. He had come to
me with several small extra charges since we crossed the Jordan, and now
expected us to pay the ❜backsheesh❜ in return for the Sheikh’s hospitality.
This we declined to do, and produced our contract, which was fortunately precise
on this question. Wishing to avoid a prolonged altercation, I told Elias he must
make a list of all extra expenses he wished us to pay as they arose, and on
arrival at Damascus we would show it to Mr. Rogers, H.B.M.’s Consul, and abide
by his decision on the subject. This strategy was entirely successful, and from
that moment we never heard anything more of the claim for extras.

A ride of two hours and a quarter over cultivated plains brought us to the walls
of Bozrah. Passing, on the left, a fine triumphal arch, we rode straight to the
gates of the fortress, over which the Turkish flag was flying. An application to
the commandant procured us immediate admission, and a practicable passage having
been found for the mules, we pitched our tents on a level plot in the interior
of the Roman theatre. The ruins at Bozrah having been lately and well described,
I shall make but a short reference to our rambles through the deserted city.

Having first visited a graceful group of columns, we followed one of the
principal streets, which was easily traced by a colonnade of Roman date, filled
in with the remains of later buildings, to the Great Mosque. This must have been
a noble structure, though, like so many other of the Saracenic masterpieces, it
is built mainly with the materials of older edifices. The marble monolithic
columns, some of which have Roman inscriptions on them, are superb. There is a
good general view from the top of the tower attached to the mosque; I nearly got
shut up there, owing to the swinging-to of a stone door, which it required all
our united strength to reopen. On the opposite side of the street was a bath,
the walls of which are decorated tastefully with inlaid squares of Greek
pattern. In this quarter are the principal Christian churches. The cathedral
must have been a fine building, and is exceedingly interesting, as a specimen of
the way in which classical architecture adapted itself to the new religion. The
external wall is square, the corners being occupied by four chapels; internally
the building is circular, with a lofty dome. Frescoes are still traceable in the
aisle. The other two churches are of smaller dimensions, and of that unlovely
style of architecture which has been rendered familiar by the London churches of
sixty years ago, of which they at once reminded us. In one of these buildings,
however, the roof was supported by a pair of noble arches. Passing through the
part of the town where the modern population burrows miserably among the ruins
of ancient splendour, we came upon a second fine triumphal arch, and the remains
of a palace. We found ourselves finally near a large reservoir, in which two of
the party bathed, while the others returned to the Castle, now close at hand. To
our great amusement the sentinels presented arms whenever we passed in or out.
The interior of the theatre, where our tents were pitched, has been more than
half filled by a gigantic storehouse, but the upper tiers of benches are in
splendid preservation. The stonework is very neatly finished, and the
decorations of the stage struck us as being in less florid style than most of
the Roman remains in this part of Syria.

Various theories have been broached to account for the strange conjunction of a
theatre and a fortress. Should I hazard a guess at the solution of the problem,
it would be, that the theatre stood originally outside the walls of the town,
and that when the more frequent visits of the Arabs, and the failing strength of
the legions, rendered it liable to injury, the still-existing fortifications
were built round it. At night a sentry was posted outside our tents, but the
quiet of the dark hours was undisturbed except by a furious storm of thunder,
lightning, and rain. Cross, always ready with sympathy for man or beast, pitied
the sorrows of the poor man on guard, and having hunted up some piastres from
his coat-pocket, he suddenly appeared in his night-shirt at the tent-door, and
presented them to the astonished soldier.

*March 21st.* — Early in the morning, we climbed up to the battlements to enjoy
the view of the plain. Large flocks were being driven out to pasture; as we
watched them, and gazed over the wide expanse of cultivated land we had ridden
through from Derat, we were naturally led to contrast the facts under our eyes
with the desolation described by Mr. Porter, and to indulge in a hope —which
even the most ardent enthusiast for the fulfilment of prophecy might share —
that better times may be in store for Bashan.

Before leaving Bozrah, we sent to thank the commandant, whom we had not yet
seen, for his courtesy. We were at once invited to visit him in his quarters, an
airy little room on the house-roof. The commandant expressed great
disappointment at our short stay, said that he had meant to offer us an
entertainment, and excused himself for not having called on the previous day, on
the ground that he thought we should be tired after our journey, and prefer to
repose. He prepared sundry documents for the villages of the Jebel, which were
handed over to Khasim. I do not fancy they did us much service, for the Druses
pride themselves on maintaining a practical independence of the Turkish Pacha at
Damascus, and are little disposed to obey the orders of his lieutenants.

We were now within the borders of a district which has acquired great celebrity
from the extent and peculiar character of its ruins, and has been recently
brought into prominent notice by the well-known Syrian traveller, Mr, Porter. A
perusal of his pages had set before us the exciting prospect of seeing whole
towns, deserted indeed, but so little ruined, that they might be inhabited again
at a moment’s notice, although said to be of an age compared to which Pompeii
may be considered a modern city. We naturally laid our plans so as to include
the places considered most noteworthy by our predecessors, and arranged a zigzag
route by which we might in three days reach the northern extremity of the Jebel
Hauran, visiting Kureiyeh, Suweideh, and Kunawat on the road. From Shuhba we
intended, if possible, to follow the plan which Mr. Porter found impracticable,
and to ride through the centre of the strange volcanic district known as the
Lejah, and celebrated equally for the bad character of its roads and its
inhabitants. Our first day’s journey was a short one, for we did not mean to
push beyond Hebran., As we rode out of Bozrah, we passed several small
reservoirs. On the way, Elias told us an amusing story of native manners. The
head-man of the village had the previous night given a feast to our muleteers.
One of them, a Christian of the Lebanon, ate with a fork. ❜Mashalla!❜ exclaimed
his Bozran host, ❜what a brute; he has not yet learned to eat with his fingers!❜

We rode across a plain strewn with volcanic boulders, with patches of
cultivation between them. Here, for the first time, we saw the Druse women, with
their extraordinary horns and long white veils. The latter only cover one-half
the face, the division being made vertically, so as to show one eye and cheek,
instead of both eyes and nothing else, in the Egyptian fashion. The Druse style
leaves room for a good deal of coquetry, and the girls with any pretensions to
good looks are at no pains to conceal them; but beauties are rare in the Hauran,
and the ugly women are, much to the traveller’s relief, uniformly bashful.

After fording a clear Welsh-like stream, one of the feeders of the Hieromax, we
rode over a perfect wilderness of stones into Kureiyeh. It was a marvel how our
animals kept their legs on such ground, but it takes a great deal to puzzle a
Syrian horse.

Under its ancient name of Kerioth, Kureiyeh is one of the places distinguished
by having had a special judgment pronounced on it by Jeremiah. We explored its
ruins on foot, and found an old tank, beside which is curious edifice, supported
by stumpy columns. We saw no stone doors equal to those at Ghusam, and the
houses were all more or less dilapidated. On the whole, though we strove to
repress our feelings, we were decidedly disappointed with the first of the
❜Giant Cities.❜ I thus recorded, on the evening of the same day, the impression
made on us by the famous stone-houses attributed by some recent writers to the
Rephaim mentioned in Deuteronomy : — ❜Among many houses, the comparatively
recent date of which is evidenced by fragments of Roman sculpture built up into
the interior walls, a few of earlier times probably exist. These may be of the
time of Og, or they may not; there is nothing to show they were built by
giants.❜

The Sheikh of the village, a powerful Druse chieftain, was away, but his steward
pressed us hard to stay to partake of a sheep, saying, ❜What will my lord say,
when he returns, and finds travellers have passed his door without tasting food?
He will be angry with me, and I shall have nothing to answer him.❜ Throughout
the Jebel Hauran we were almost oppressed by the hospitality of the inhabitants,
and did not find any inconvenience from being unattended by a Druse escort.

Hebran is in sight from Kureiyeh, and the track to it is a gradual ascent. The
first half of the way is dreary and monotonous, but, as we neared our
resting-place, dwarf oaks clothed the hillsides; and though, being unprovided
with magnifying glasses or poetical imaginations, we failed to discover the
❜dizzy crags❜ and ❜deep ravines❜ described by a previous traveller, the
landscape redeemed itself from the charge of actual ugliness. We met many
parties of villagers on the road —some returning from labour in the fields,
others driving laden donkeys. The position of Hebran itself is really fine. It
stands out boldly on a spur of the mountains, if a range rising less than 3,000
feet from the tablelands at their base may be dignified by the name. From the
ruined temple which crowns the crest, a wonderful panoramic view is obtained of
the plain-country of Bashan. The temple itself is not very remarkable, compared
with the ruins we afterwards saw. In the village we found no antiquities worthy
of notice, although the inhabitants were very civil in pointing out any old
carvings or inscriptions likely to interest us. The younger portion of the
population, never having seen so many Europeans before, thought us a capital
joke, and enjoyed themselves immensely at our expense.

An isolated building, about a quarter of a mile to the south-east of the
village, attracted our attention,and we were well repaid for visiting it. As it
was the first specimen of stone architecture we saw which was at all perfect, I
will describe it in detail. On the ground-floor a stone door led into a long
room, the ceiling of which, made of huge blocks of stone, was supported by two
circular arches. In this instance I did not notice any staircase, but in other
buildings it was outside the walls; above were several small rooms, where a
giant must often have knocked his head, and one curiously small door, about four
feet high. The windows were closed by stone shutters, which still swung more or
less easily in their sockets.

Our tents were pitched in a field below the village, whence the view of the
conical peak of El-Kleib, ❜the Little Heart,❜ now temptingly near at hand,
rising behind low wooded hills, suggested an ascent on the following morning.
Elias and Khasim went off in the evening to take coffee at the Sheikh’s, where,
if the account Elias afterwards gave was true, guests and host must have
required all their Oriental politeness to get through the evening pleasantly.

In the course of conversation, it came out that Khasim, in some affray with the
Druses, had killed a brother of the Sheikh; but matters were squared by the
discovery that the Sheikh had killed a near relation of Khasim, and they agreed
to postpone all discussion on the subject. I fancy that during the next few
days, Elias’s diplomatie talent, which was very great, found constant employment
in keeping things smooth between our escort and the Druses, who, living in a
normal state of resistance to the Government, naturally look with dislike on its
officers. Our dragoman must have burthened his conscience with no slight weight
if he really uttered half the untruths for which he afterwards took credit. We
were represented by him as princes, Williams being specially distinguished as
the American prince, while Elias modestly described himself as a commissioner
sent by the Government to secure us proper attention, and to report where it was
found wanting. Doubtless he played the part well, for he was a great dandy in
his dress, always wearing a splendid gold-shot kefiyeh, and, to use his own
words, he had a ❜certaine politesse, tout a fait particuliere,❜ in the Arab
tongue.

*March 22nd.* — This morning the ground was hard with white frost. This was not
extraordinary, for we were encamped at a height of 4,000 feet, and snow lay in
patches not far above us. We despatched our baggage-mules, under Mohammed’s
charge, straight over the hills to Kunawat, as we intended to take a
counsiderable circuit in order to visit Suweideh and Atil.

A sea of mist covered the plain below us, and before long the fleecy billows
broke against and rolled up the hillsides, enwrapping us in their chilly folds.
A short ride across a brow, covered with stunted oaks, and watered by numerous
springs, brought us to Kufr. The place must have been very large, to judge by
its ruins, but its inhabitants do not now appear to be numerous. In a long
ramble in search of the gates, 10 feet high, mentioned by Porter, I came across
relics of a Roman temple, many old houses, and a curious window, consisting of
two square apertures, with a circular one in the middle, all sheltered by a
projecting eave. The doors turned out to be 7 feet high; they were folding, and
each half was of a single block; they did not fully fill the gateway, which was
a foot loftier. The ruins formed a perfect labyrinth, and we separated, each
taking a quarter in order to examine thew as thoroughly as time would permit.

It was but a short distance to the foot of El-Kleib, 5,725 feet, the finest in
form and second in height of the summits of Jebel Hauran. Tucker and I started
on foot, with Francois, to ascend it, leaving the rest of the party with the
horses, The mountain presents the appearance of a symmetrical cone clothed with
a dense forest of evergreen oak, except on the south, where the lava and scoriae
are entirely bare. Just under the highest point is a small but very perfect
crater. On the summit, layers of squared stones, the foundation of some ancient
building, are visible. The view must be very striking; unluckily a dense mist
hid it from us, and we waited in vain in hopes of its clearing off. In
descending, we contrived to miss our way, and wandered about for some time,
discharging revolvers into the fog, till we fell in with some peasants
ploughing, and managed to understand their directions, Rejoining our friends, we
remounted, and rode nearly due west to Suweideh, one of the chief seats of the
Druse power. When we emerged from the cold mist that had enveloped us, the
country was by no means interesting, and we were glad when Suweideh appeared in
the distance. On arriving there, we avoided halting near the house of the chief,
not wishing to waste time in receiving his tedious hospitality, and therefore
cast but a passing glance at the ten columns of a ruined temple close to his
door. Riding on through the town, we dismounted to visit the interesting remains
of an ancient house; the masonry was extraordinarily massive, like that of a
Cyclopean wall, and the building impressed us with the appearance of greater
antiquity than any other we saw in the Hauran. We then continued our journey,
and crossing the stream, which flows in a deep bed on the north side of the
town, rode up to a fine Roman tomb, erected by a husband to his wife.^[^0201]^ A
broad track led us over the bare spurs, through which the hills sink down into
the plain, to Atil. Here there are the ruins of two diminutive but exquisitely
decorated temples. The immense size of the stones employed in the construction
of these small buildings was very remarkable. Close to one of the temples we
found some good pieces of carving — a winged figure of Victory, a horse, and a
fine head of Apollo. Nothing could exceed the intelligence and courtesy of the
inhabitants in pointing out the Roman fragments which lay about everywhere. We
were led, through an exceptionally heavy stone door, into a house of very
ancientlooking and massive masonry, to inspect a bit of the frieze of one of the
temples, which was built into the interior wall. This must be taken for what it
is worth, but it aided to shake our belief in the extreme antiquity of the
greater number of the Hauran ruins. The columns of Kunawat were already in sight
over intervening woods, and half-an-hour’s scramble up a rocky path brought us
to our tents, which had been pitched in a charming situation between the town
and the beautiful temple, which stands apart from the other ruins on the west.

*March 23rd.* — Early in the morning, a dense mist again veiled the plain;
Hermon alone stood up above it, flushed with a sunrise glow, and as the bells of
the outgoing flocks rang through the air, we could almost fancy ourselves in the
Alps. Kunawat, the ancient Kenath, celebrated for the worship of Astarte, whose
image now lies prostrate before her ruined temple, is built on the edge of an
upland plateau, on which its principal group of buildings stands; the remainder
of the place, enclosed by walls, runs down the slope, and overlooks the great
plain. In the background rises a circle of wooded hills, and on one side a
strong green torrent forces its way in numerous cascades through a narrow
ravine. On a brow visible from the plain, and forming a landmark for the
traveller approaching Kunawat, stands a temple raised on a high artificial
platform. The wall and many of the columns have been overthrown, but enough is
left standing to form one of the most picturesque ruins in Syria.

A little higher up the hillside seems to have been the fashionable cemetery, and
we found numerous mausoleumms scattered amongst the thick underwood. Though
varying in size and architecture, they agree in their general form, which is
that of a small square tower, with a chamber inside containing shelves for
coffins. Entering the old city walls, which are still well preserved, we were
led to a most remarkable group of ruins, now called the Serai, or palace. Here
we found the remains of a temple, and of an extensive building, or rather
several buildings, which must have been used either as a palace or for some
public purpose. The richness of the architectural ornaments, and the picturesque
irregularity of the whole mass, would make these ruins beautiful without their
additional attractions. The space round them is paved, and (as is seen where the
pavement has fallen in) supported on the arches of large subterranean
reservoirs. The streams, which formerly filled them, now burst out everywhere
among the ruins, and cause the growth of a mass of vegetation which conceals the
surrounding desolation with a mantle of greenery, such as is seldom seen in the
East. Some of the water flows down a conduit, to work an ancient mill, still
perfect, and in use. It is an old one-storied chamber; the windows have the
usual stone shutters, and nothing, except perhaps the millstone, has been
changed since it was built. On the steep path leading down into the gorge, we
remarked several fine stone doors, one of which was ornamented with vine-leaves,
and another with bosses. In the centre of the town is an old Christian church,
now used as a storehouse; inside another building we saw a very flat arch of
great span. Kunawat would repay a much more careful inspection than we were able
to give it. Descending over a beautiful piece of Roman pavement, to the bridge,
we turned aside to inspect the remains on the right bank. Here there is a quaint
little theatre, and a temple with a fountain in its centre, both on a very small
scale. Steps cut in the rock lead up to the brow, on which stood a towertomb.
Kunawat is the religious centre of the Hauran Druses, and a great Sheikh lives
here; but, anxious to spend all our time in the ruins, we did not make any
advances, and our intercourse, although friendly, was slight. To-day we again
sent our luggage on by a short cut. The ride down to Suleim is very pretty.
Although there are no large trees, the environs of Kunawat are clothed in
luxuriant vegetation, and the ground was painted with anemones, varying between
bright scarlet and pure white, through numerous shades of pink and purple.

In the middle of a wood we turned off the path, to visit an isolated ruin placed
on a slight eminence. There was a large quadrangle, enclosed by walls, against
one of which stood a small building, with some good carving on the doorway.
Suleim is in the bare country; its principal attraction is a small temple with
an exquisite frieze: we also noticed a fine doorway, over which was a long
inscription in Greek hexameters. Close to the temple is a subterranean reservoir
similar to those at Kunawat. We were now approaching the boundaries of that
curious tract of country which has been successively known as Argob,
Trachonitis, and the Lejah. In point of fact, it is nothing but a huge
lava-glacier, if one may be pardoned the expression. The northern summits of
Jebel Hauran are all volcanic cones; from these the lava-streams have issued
forth, and flowing northwards have spread fanwise over a vast extent of country.

The limit of the inundation is in general sharply defined, and those who have
ridden along the borders of the Lejah, and wondered at its broken crags and
forbidding aspect of desolation, have not unnaturally taken a part for the
whole, and described the entire tract as absolutely unproductive and desert. The
wild and rapacious character of the inhabitants has added to its reputation for
inaccessibility, and to the vague feeling of terror with which it has been often
associated. We were now in full view of its south-west border, and the towns of
Nejran and Edrei, the latter celebrated as the capital of Og, were plainly
distinguishable. Our track bore away to the east, along the lower slopes of the
hills. Leaving on our right the hamlet of Murduk, the inhabitants of which were
ploughing the neighbouring fields, we soon entered a barren volcanic tract of
country. Our road gradually ascended, in the direction of a depression under the
most southern of the three conspicuous cones which are the northern outposts of
the Jebel Hauran. The surface over which we were riding was rocky and broken,
and lava-crags protruded on all sides, with little beds of withered grass lying
amongst them. The desolation of the scenery increased as we advanced, and its
effect was rather heightened than diminished by the gaunt arches of a long Roman
aqueduct which had supplied the ancient Shuhba with water drawn from Abu Tumeis,
the fourth in height of the summits of Jebel Hauran. As we rounded the
south-east corner of the volcano, we came suddenly upon the old gateway of the
Roman town, the very name of which has been lost. Inside the walls, all was as
desolate as without; the old roadway was torn up, and the modern track zigzagged
in and out, and up and down, among the lava-crags, which were contorted into the
most extraordinary forms. What motive can have led to a large town being built
on a site so gloomy, and so little adapted to human habitation, it is hard to
divine. Its inhabitants had at least one advantage; the journey to the shades
must have been robbed of half its terrors to men who, on their arrival in Hades,
found the scenery just like home, and Pluto’s palace not quite so sombre-looking
as their own theatre. In its prosperity Shuhba must have been a strange city; in
its desolation it is the weirdest spot imaginable.

The ruins of the ancient town and the modern village do not together occupy
quite a quarter of the extent of ground included within the ancient walls. We
found our tents pitched in an enclosure near the inhabited houses. Our muleteers
had managed to get into a dispute with the people about the camping-ground, and
there had been some disturbance; the question had, however, been referred to the
Sheikh, who, on hearing they were the servants of Englishmen, at once ordered
all civility to be shown them, and on our arrival peace was quite restored.

The ruins at Shuhba are not so ornate as others in this country, but are
peculiarly interesting. There are two temples, similar in character to many we
had seen elsewhere, and a mysterious building which looks as if it might have
formed the apse of a ❛basilica,❜ and which seems to have puzzled most
travellers. The four main streets are still easily traceable, and, at their
point of junction, the pedestals, once probably crowned with groups of statuary,
are still entire. From this point to the southern gate of the city, a distance
of full one-third of a mile, the pavement is as perfect as the day it was laid
down. The baths were the best preserved we had yet seen; they contained several
large and handsome chambers, and the stucco still adhered to the interior walls.
Many of the pipes remain in their places, and the great aqueduct which supplied
the water still exists, and terminates beside the building. We found a staircase
which led us on to the top of its arches, whence we had an excellent general
view of the bare northern slopes of Jebel Hauran, and the plain, dotted with
conical mounds, which spreads to the east of it. South of the walls are some
large open reservoirs. On our way back we visited the theatre, which looks
spacious externally, but the building is so exceedingly solid that the size of
the interior is disappointing. The massiveness of the masonry and the hardness
of the material (black basalt) have been the causes of its preservation. The
stage, the rooms and passages behind it, are uninjured, and very slight repairs
would be wanted to make the building again serviceable.

Sheikh Fares, who received Mr. Porter so hospitably, was dead, and had been
succeeded by his son. The Sheikh of Shuhba is one of the most powerful of the
Druse chieftains, and although of late we had made it a rule to avoid
invitations and visits of ceremony, we felt it would be wrong not to call on
him, especially as we wanted some advice and information as to the best route
through the ill-reputed Lejah. Having sent notice of our intention, we went in a
body to pay our respects. A large gateway led into a courtyard surrounded by
buildings. As we entered, seven dignified white-turbaned Druses bowed to the
ground; then the Sheikh — a fine-looking man about thirty-five years of age —
came forth to welcome us, and ushered us into his abode. We were received in the
winter residence, a large ill-lighted room, with a fireplace in the centre, and
divans round it. The Sheikh took his place on one side of the fire, attended by
a younger brother, and several white-bearded elders. We, with our guard and
Francois in the background, sat opposite to him. The room was quite filled with
villagers. The conversation opened with the usual compliments and enquiries as
to the success of our journey, but after we had requested the young brother to
sit down, which he at first declined to do, it diverged into more general
topics. We enquired as to the possibility of traversing the interior of the
Lejah, and received satisfactory replies. We were told that in two days we might
easily reach Khubab, on the north-western border, but that Ahireh, half a day’s
journey distant, was the only stopping-place on the road, as Damet-el-Alya was
now uninhabited.

Meanwhile coffee was prepared. Among those Easterns who maintain their primitive
customs, this is a very important ceremony, and must always be performed in
public. The coffee-maker is an old servant, well practised in the art, and any
failure on his part would be considered a disgrace to the whole household. In
the present case the beans were first roasted over the fire in an open pan,
which the Sheikh himself took occasionally into his hand for a moment, in order
to keep up the appearance of serving his guests in person. Then followed the
pounding. This is done in a finely-carved wooden mortar, and must require
considerable dexterity, as the operator is expected to beat a lively march, like
the rat-a-tat of a French drummer. The coffee was next boiled in a small
tin-pot, and when ready was tasted by the maker, to show that it had not been
poisoned. The Sheikh himself sweetened the fragrant beverage, which was handed
round to us in the usual Eastern cups. The taste and aroma were delicious, but
an unfortunate detail of etiquette prevented our indulging in such deep
potations as we should have liked. In the filling of cups, as in greater things,
the Eastern rule is exactly the reverse of the Western. Instead of filling a
friend’s glass to the brim, as a mark of goodwill, you give him a mere spoonful
at the bottom of his cup; to pour out a full cup is a declaration of enmity to
the man to whom it is presented. After the select circle round the fire had been
served twice, the coffee was sent round to the crowd who filled up the
background. As soon as the ceremony was concluded we rose to go, but the Sheikh
came out with us, and showed us his summer residence, the facade of which was
rather striking. A flight of steps led up to a portico, built to catch the cool
northern breezes from Hermon, and supported by two pillars crowned by
magnificent capitals, stolen from some ancient building. The interior was
gaudily painted, in the usual Eastern style, with quaint representations of
birds and beasts; built into the walls of the courtyard we noticed two pieces of
sculpture, one representing a seated figure, the other a winged wind; the latter
struck us as good.

On the way back to our tents we were taken into a camel-stable, above the door
of which was a beautifullycut Greek inscription. Later in the evening the Sheikh
and his son, a sleepy boy of about twelve years old, returned our visit. The
Sheikh talked a great deal of the constant friendship which had existed between
the English and the Druses, and of his pleasure at seeing any members of our
nation in the Hauran. Our visitors stayed so long that our stock of conversation
became completely exhausted, and we were immensely relieved when they departed.

We hired a Druse to guide us through the Lejah, as Khasim was unacquainted with
the paths in its interior, and set out on the morning of the 24th, which was
dull and showery. We rode out of Shuhba, by a gap near the north-west corner of
the walls, and skirting the north base of the same cone we had passed on the
previous day, descended a long slope covered with the most extraordinary
lava-streams, cracked in places exactly like the broken portion of a glacier.
Mohammed, Khasim’s subordinate, managed to be left behind for the second time,
and did not, come up with us till we had been nearly an hour on the road. Khasim
meantime was alarmed lest the Druses should have done him some mischief. When
the truant appeared, he told us that he had been purposely misdirected. If there
was any truth in his statement, which I very much doubt, it was the solitary
unfriendly act we met with among the Druses of the Jebel Hauran, whom we found
(as Mr. Porter well describes them) ❛a people of patriarchal manners and genuine
patriarchal hospitality.❜ 

The ground after a time became rather less rugged, and some traces of
cultivation appeared before we passed the hamlet of Selakhid, a quarter of a
mile to the right. Its Sheikh rode out to invite us to turn aside and rest in
his house. He was well-mounted, and was a most picturesque figure, as he
caracoled by our side, accoutred in jackboots, and clad in loose-flowing
garments, which rivalled the rainbow in their varied colours. Finding we were
not to be persuaded, he rode with us for some distance, and then, wishing us a
prosperous journey, turned back to his home. Crossing the Roman highroad from
Bozrah to Damascus, which ran through the centre of the Lejah, and leaving
another village behind us on the left, we came to a tract bristling with
lava-crags, and scantily covered with gaunt deciduous trees. This kind of
country continued till we came in sight of Ahireh, which is situated in a sort
of oasis with a good deal of corn-land to the westward. The village is built at
the foot of Tell Ahmar, a green mound about the size of Primrose Hill, which is
crowned by a Mahommetan ❛wely,❜ or tomb. It is the highest eminence in the
Lejah, of which it commands a complete view. The proportion of green grass and
brown rock seemed pretty equal: here and there a black spot showed the position
of a village. We spent the afternoon in rambling about among the houses of
Alireh, and came upon four Greek inscriptions, some heavy stone doors, and
fragments of carving from a small temple. The people, far from showing any
jealousy of our copying the inscriptions, took pains to point them out. The only
other curiosity we lighted upon was a great cave, probably used as a tank. The
Sheikh of the village came down to our tents, but his looks were not
prepossessing, and we did not cultivate his acquaintance. He was, however,
reputed to be a gallant soldier, and a deep sabre-cut across his face confirmed
his reputation, although it increased the ugliness of an otherwise ruffianly
countenance.

*March 25th.* — The night was disturbed by rain-storms and howling dogs; the
latter we quieted by firing off a revolver at one of the noisiest. No more
formidable animals made their appearance, and we had not the luck of Mr. Porter
and his friends, who, during the night they spent within the Lejah, were
surrounded by jackals, wolves, and hyenas, and afterwards somewhat naively
congratulated themselves on the fulfilment of Isaiah’s remarkable prediction:
❛The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of the
island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow.❜ The village Sheikh had, as
usual, entertained our guard in the evening, and had bragged to Khasim of his
power, saying that he might tell the Pasha of Damascus to come with 5,000 men at
his back, and he would beat him. In the morning this warlike hero condescended
to cheat our muleteers out of six francs, in settling for some provender they
had bought; but before riding off we sent for him, and told him very plainly our
opinion of his conduct.

The morning was damp and lowering, and we made up our minds for a wet day, or
(as Williams put it) ❛guessed it was going to flop.❜  We were not deceived, and
when we reached Damet-el-Alya, were glad to stable our horses and shelter
ourselves in a mosque with stone doors and windows, while we ate our lunch. The
pelting rain interfered somewhat with our explorations, but I found one
interesting old house. The folding-gates of the entrance arch, still in their
places, led into a courtyard, from which several doors opened into rooms of
various sizes. The basement, ground and first floors were all perfect; the
staircase was, as usual, external. Our baggage-mules had gone on while we
rested, and we therefore shortened our halt, and rode on in pursuit, as fast as
the nature of the ground would permit, for the character of the district was so
bad that we were uneasy at leaving them long unprotected. The interior of the
Lejah is not such a desert as it has been represented, and the path was
decidedly better than the highway from Jerusalem to Nablous. In the wilder parts
little green paddocks are interspersed between the banks of lava, and we several
times during the day came upon considerable tracts of corn-land. The outside rim
answers better to the description given of the whole in Murray’s ❛Syria❜; but
even here the language must be modified, and ❛mound❜ must be read everywhere for
❛hill❜ and ❛crack❜ or ❛depression❜ for ❛ravine.❜ 

We met with no dangerous characters during the day to justify the bad name the
district has acquired—perhaps the rain kept them all at home; but so easy and
unadventurous was our progress that we had some difficulty in realising the fact
that, with the exception of Burckhardt and Mr. Cyril Graham, we were the only
European travellers who had succeeded in penetrating into the interior of the
Lejah. As we neared the edge of the ❛black country❜ the scenery became wildly
picturesque; several villages occupied the knolls before us, their dark towers
at a distance reminding us forcibly of feudal castles. Tucker and I turned off;
under Khastin’s escort, to visit Zebireh, the nearest of these villages, and
found it entirely deserted. There were plenty of old stone houses, and in one
was an upstairs-room, with a fireplace, and stone window-shutters. The roofs
were in some instances supported by quaint pillars, primitively constructed of
stones of unequal sizes, piled, like cheeses, one on another. The manner of
building the interior walls in these strange dwellings is very curious. A
framework is first constructed of large stones, with square pigeon-holes left
between them; these are generally filled up, but sometimes left open, when they
look not unlike wine-bins. We found here a stable with a stone manger, and also
saw an inscription recording the erection of some monument, ❛on account of the
safety of the Lord Autocrator Severus Antoninus Caesar, Britannicus❜  Having
finished our explorations we remounted, and, leaving behind us several mounds
covered with towers, rode through a sort of pass or gap in the high bank of lava
which runs along this side of the Lejah. In about an hour we reached Khubab,
situated on the edge of the plain, where our companions had arrived before us.
They amused us with the account of a row, of which they had been the cause, and
which had only just terminated. The history of the dispute was rather
complicated. The Sheikh, it seems, indicated to Elias a plot of ground where our
tents might be pitched, and his son, a lad of seventeen, came down to
superintend the proceedings. The owner of the ground and his child, a mere boy,
then appeared on the scene, and objected to the arrangement which had been made;
the boy, by some remark, angered the Sheikh’s son, and got his ears boxed;
whereupon the outraged father knocked the Sheikh’s son down, and made his nose
bleed. There was an immediate melée; swords were drawn, the whole village ran
together—the men with their weapons, and the women screaming: but the culprit
very discreetly put an end to the disturbance by running away, and leaving the
Sheikh to swear revenge at his leisure.

The people of Khubab call themselves Christians, but they are dirtier and less
well-to-do than their Druse neighbours. The women, who go about unveiled, are
peculiarly hideous.

*March 26th.* — When we awoke in the morning, we found ourselves wrapt in a
dense fog, but the mist soon cleared off, and the day became brilliantly fine.
Our encampment was surrounded by most peculiar-looking hillocks of lava, which,
together with house-walls of huge stones, formed a characteristic specimen of
Lejah scenery. A few minutes’ ride brought us out on the level plain. On one
side the snowy mass of Hermon rose grandly over nearer green ranges; on the
other was the rugged coast of the ❛black country,❜ which here juts out in a
promontory, and there recedes, leaving room for a grassy bay. At the cross-roads
opposite Sgaarah, we met a man riding furiously from the plain. He shouted to
us, in passing, that his mule had just been stolen by a party of Arabs, and
galloped on into the village. We halted on a rocky projecting brow, and then
waited to lunch, and see what would happen next. While Tucker demolished the
sardines, Williams, who even in ordinary life was a martial personage, and
Elias, who was anxious to acquire the reputation of a fire-cater, exchanged the
shot in their guns for bullets, with a military air which must have struck
terror into the heart of the boldest Bedouin. No opportunity, however, occurred
for the display of valour, and we had to content ourselves with the amusement of
watching the shepherds driving in their flocks hurriedly from the plain, and the
villagers issuing forth in twos and threes — some mounted, some on foot— in
quest of the marauders. Of course nothing was seen of them, and we continued our
march in peace.

The track to Mismiyeh, which is well within the borders of the Lejah, leads over
very rugged ground. Our horses scrambled over great solidified waves of the
lava-flood, divided by little grass-grown hollows, in one of which Elias
surprised and slew a partridge. We determined to pitch our tents just outside
the Roman temple, which is the most striking ruin of Mismiyeh. There was not
sufficient depth of soil to drive in the pegs, but we tied the ropes to big
stones, which answered all the purpose. Our ride had not been long, and we had
plenty of daylight left to explore the place. The little temple was the most
perfect we had yet seen; part of the portico was destroyed, and the central dome
had fallen in, otherwise it was in good preservation. On either side of the
doorway were niches for statues, under which were carved the words ❛Pax,❜  and
❛Bisis❜  (sic). The building was square externally, but a sort of chancel was
formed in the interior by shutting off a small vestry for the priests, and a
staircase which leads on to the roof. The dome was supported on four columns,
which are all standing, and the walls were decorated with statues. The most
striking feature of the interior was, however, a beautiful fanshell apse, in
very good preservation. From the roof there is a wonderful panorama, more
extensive, but resembling the view already described: on one side the green
plain and hills, backed by snowy Hermon; on the other, the black Lejah, the most
desolate portion of which is here visible, with the summits of Jebel Hauran
rising in the distance behind Tell-Ahmar, which was easily distinguished by its
white ❛wely.❜ 

A further ramble was rewarded by several discoveries, the most important being a
large house in the Bashan style of architecture, but evidently of Roman date. An
arched gateway led into a courtyard, from which staircases gave access to the
first-floor, which contained one noble room — the ceiling decorated with a fine
cornice, and supported by an arch eighteen feet in height, from the floor to the
keystone. The fact of all the roofs being constructed of stone renders some such
support necessary in every room of too large size, to admit of the heavy blocks
stretching from wall to wall. We noticed curious recesses in the walls, which
may perhaps have been intended for the Penates. This fine building may have been
the residence of the Roman governors of Trachonitis, as Mismiyeh was, we know,
the capital town of that province. We saw some well-executed stone-carving, such
as twisted snakes, and a double Greek pattern, and encountered numerous stone
doors. We found one pair eight feet high, and saw six *in situ* in one
courtyard. All that we observed confirmed our opinion that the stone houses —
which, from their peculiar construction, and especially from the rude
massiveness of their stone doors, window-shutters, and rafters, have been
represented as of extreme antiquity — are of comparatively modern date. Surely
no one without a preconceived theory to support, will maintain that where every
public building — whether temple, theatre, triumphal arch, tomb, or church — is
of Roman or later date, the private dwellings are, as a rule, 1,800 years older.

In the larger buildings, the frequent use of the arch, and the introduction of
classical ornamentation, are of themselves proofs of a late origin, and our wish
to recognise in the smaller and ruder houses the dwelling-places of a
prehistoric race, was frequently frustrated by the discovery of friezes and
classical inscriptions built into their interior walls. The stone doors and
shutters, which attract the attention of all travellers, are characteristic of
the country, not of any period in its history, and we found them alike in the
Roman temple, the Christian church, and the Saracenic mosque. The finest
specimens, notably that of which a picture is given in Mr. Porter’s book, are
covered with Roman ornaments.

The Pentateuch tells us that Bashan was once inhabited by giants, and it has
been argued that the size of the stone houses shows that they were built by a
race of abnormal stature, and proves the date of their construction. In reality,
however, the private dwellings are the reverse of gigantic, and the rooms they
contain are to modern ideas small. If gates are sometimes found eight feet in
height, they are (as far as we saw) always in positions where animals as well as
men had occasion to pass under them, and those found at the present day in
similar situations are of the same dimensions. The stone doors guarding the
entrances to the vineyards around Tabreez are larger and more massive than any
we saw in Bashan.

The extent and number of the ruined towns are used as an argument that they are
the remains of the sixty fenced cities conquered and destroyed by Moses.
Travellers are too apt to forget that Syria formed a portion of the Christian
Empire of Constantinople, and that in the fifth century there were thirty-three
Christian bishops in the Hauran alone. The population which built the churches
and the theatres was quite numerous enough to have filled the ruined houses
which now remain. If any buildings older than our era still exist in the Hauran,
they are, I believe, exceptions, and do not disprove our conclusion that a false
impression is given by describing the ruins of Bozral, Kunawat, Suweideh, and
Shuhba — in fact, those of Roman provincial towns — as ❛Giant Cities❜. It is not
of Og but of the Antonines, not of the Israelitish but of the Saracenic
conquest, that most modern travellers in the Hauran will be reminded.

Mismtych is inhabited, at present, by a few families of beggarly Sulut Arabs,
who have so far abandoned the traditions of their race as to condescend to live
within walls. They are great rascals, and much addicted to petty thieving. Our
muleteers got into a dispute with some of them during the afternoon, whereupon
Elias, on his own responsibility, ordered the arrest of the leading villager,
and proclaimed that ❛the Beys willed he should be carried to Damascus.❜ The
elders came down to represent the youth of the culprit, and to beg Elias to
deprecate the wrath of the Beys. No reference was in reality made to us, but the
prisoner was released, with an admonition to the natives in general, that they
had better be careful for the future, as a word from us to the Pasha would
ensure their ruin.

*March 27th.* — We now finally turned our backs on the Lejah, and prepared to
cross the strip of ❛debateable ground❜ which lay between us and Deir Ali, the
fronticr village of the Damascus district. The plain across which we rode was
for some miles covered with scrub, bright yellow flowers, and green herbage, on
which immense flocks of sheep and camels were feeding. We passed close to the
tents, seventeen in number, of their owners. A tall spear stuck into the ground
before the door marked the abode of the Sheikh. He came out and entreated us to
alight and partake of coffee, and when we excused ourselves, brought out a huge
bowl of milk. It was rather a relief to meet with so pleasant a reception, as
the Sulut tribe, to which these Arabs belonged, bears anything but a good
character.

The ground grew more stony and barren as we approached the foot of Jebel Mania;
we noticed curious rows of artificial pools, made to catch and retain the waters
of the rainy season, but now dry and faller into decay. The first building we
came to was an isolated farmhouse, built like a fortress, with strong iron gates
to resist the marauders of the neighbouring desert. Another hour’s ride over a
bleak plateau, during which Hermon, now comparatively close at hand, towered
grandly before our eyes, brought us to Deir Ali, a large and prosperous Druse
village. The neighbourhood is rendered fertile by abundant springs, and for the
first time since leaving Bethlehem, we saw the fig, the vine, the olive, and the
poplar growing luxuriantly.

We lunched under the shade of some gnarled old olives, finer specimens of the
tree than are usually seen in Syria. The further ride to Kesweh was round the
bare flanks of Jebel Mania, and had nothing but the distant view of Hermon to
make it interesting. We saw, away to our left, the great caravanserai called the
Khan Denun, where the Mecea caravan rests on the first night after its departure
from Damascus. As we neared the Nahr-el-Awaj (the ancient Pharpar), the white
clean-looking houses and minarets of Kesweh appeared on its further bank; the
stream itself was hidden in the thicket of fruit-trees which lines its course.
The river was crossed by a stone bridge; but so swollen were the waters, owing
to the recent rains, and the melting of the snows on Hermon, that they touched
the keystones of the arches, and looked as if they would soon carry away the
whole fabric. Stalls for the sale of provisions and saddlery showed that we had
entered a district where there was some security for property and attempt at
trade; a paved piece of road bore witness to the fact of our being on an old
highway of commerce ; while the recently-erected telegraph-wire between Damascus
and El-Mezarib, the capital of the Hauran, proved that the Turks are mot
altogether blind to the advantages to be reaped from the adoption of the
discoveries of Western science. Kesweh is a neat but unremarkable Syrian
village; our tents were pitched on a grassy brow before the place, near some
turban-capped tombstones. Tucker and Williams went in pursuit of birds down the
banks of the Pharpar, but came back empty-handed. One of Khasim’s pistols was
stolen in the night, but he got it back next morning by paying a small
❜backsheesh❜ to the thief, or (as he preferred to call himself) finder, of the
missing weapon.

*March 28th.* — A broad beaten track runs over the hills which separate the
basins of the Pharpar and Abana. Winding through a gap in the range, we came in
sight of Dareiya, a town some miles west of Damascus, surrounded by orchards.
After turning to the right we crossed a low spur of Jebel-el-Aswad, and caught
our first view of the city, spread out across the plain, backed by a mass of
verdure, and the tawny slopes of Anti-Lebanon. The scene, though very striking,
did not impress us so much as similar views of Cairo. Damascus is singularly
poor in the minarets which lend such a charm to its Egyptian rival. While
entering carelessly over the flat expanse between us and the gates, the sudden
failure of a stirrup-leather gave me a tumble upon the hard ground. Luckily I
did not hurt myself seriously, but neuralgia, a stiff back, and barked knuckles
served to moderate any feelings of triumph at the successful conclusion of our
novel journey from Jerusalem, and the opening of what may prove a new route for
Eastern travellers, and I needed Francois’ prompt consolation, ❛Ah, monsieur,
vous faites bien de suivre l'exemple de St. Paul,❜ to reconcile me to the
complication of bodily ills. A review of Turkish troops was going on outside the
city; the cavalry were remarkably wellmounted.

After passing the gates we rode along the shabby boulevard which traverses the
suburbs, and forms an entrance to Damascus. Leaving the bazaars on our right, we
at last reached Demetri’s Hotel, a pleasant house built, in the usual Damascene
style, round a courtyard full of lemontrees.

We remained a week in these comfortable quarters. Here our connection with
Khasim ended as satisfactorily as it had begun, for he was more than contented
with the ❜backsheesh❜ we gave him. Our Trans-Jordanic trip added only *5l.*
a-head to the usual dragomanic expenses, which, considering where we had been,
and what we had seen, was a very small sum.

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0200]: [Eastern travellers, who object to swallowing as much mud and insect life as water, should provide themselves before leaving England with portable filters.]{.footnote}

[^0201]: [It is well described in ❛Giant Cities❜  p. 55.]{.footnote}
