# CHAPTER III.<br /><small> LEBANON AND THE LEVANT.</small>{#three .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Damascus — Bazaars and Gardens — An Enthusiastic Freemason — Snowstorm on
Anti-Lebanon — Baalbee — An  Alpine Walk — The Cedurs— Return to Beyrout —
Cyprus and Rhodes — Smyrna — The Valley of the Maeander — Excavations at Ephesus
— Constantinople — The Persian Khan — May-Day at the Sweet Waters — Preparations
for the Caucusus.<br /><br />
::::

THERE are very few sights in Damascus, unless one considers as such the window
from which St. Paul was let down, and the tomb of the legendary porter who aided
his escape. The Great Mosque is fine, but not so interesting as that at
Jerusalem. The commercial aspect of the place is the most striking; the bazaars,
the rough wooden roofs of which rather spoil their otherwise rich effect, are
very extensive; and though Manchester goods meet you at every turn, the ways and
manners of the people are purely Eastern. It is a very seductive place to go
shopping in; Williams once spent a whole day in a silk-mercer’s den in the Great
Khan, and came home in the evening followed by a laden with gorgeous scarves.
Our friend, despite the time and bargaining his purchases had cost him, was
troubled with an uneasy suspicion that, to use his own expression, ❛the old
fellow had regularly waggled him.❜ The gardens round the town are rather
orchards than gardens in our sense of the word; but at this season, with the
fruit-trees in full blossom, they were very beautiful, and it was amusing on
Sunday to stroll amongst the numerous companies of citizens, sitting in circles,
chatting and telling stories under the shade. The fashionable ladies’ dress is a
white sheet, and a coloured handkerchief over the head; but the infantine
population swell about in scarlet and gold tunics, and all manner of ❛pomps and
vanities.❜

At the *table-d’hote* there was much discussion about the expedition which the
Pasha was said to be about to make to Palmyra; he proposed to spend a month in
the trip, and to take with him a small army, including artillery. Some of the
travellers at our hotel were staying on in order to avail themselves of the
opportunity of going in his suite; among them was an elderly American, a
professor at one of the universities in the Western States, who in his quality
of a Freemason had already called on the Pasha and Abd-el-Kader, both of whom
are brothers of the craft, and now announced his purpose of ❛planting the banner
of Freemasonry on the ruins of Palmyra.❜ He was unfortunately prevented from
fulfilling his mission by the Pasha abandoning his design. Before leaving
Damascus we had the pleasure of seeing Mr. Rogers, the English Consul-General,
to whom we handed over our letter to the Pasha, which we had not found an
opportunity of presenting, with a request that he would use it in securing for
Khasim promotion to a higher grade, in which we felt sure he would not dishonour
our recommendation. Mr. Rogers kindly showed me some of the most valuable trays
of his fine collection of Eastern coins, and also a coat-of-mail taken by the
Pasha from an Adwan Sheikh in the previous year, and a noble sword, which, as
was recorded by an inscription in gold letters on its blade, had belonged to a
son of the famous Saladin.

The last days of our stay at Damascus were so cold that we had fires in our
room. We left on April 3rd, and travelled in three days along the ordinary track
to Baalbee. The general character of the Anti-Lebanon scenery is poor, but there
is one charming spot, Ashrafiyeh, perhaps the most picturesque in Syria, and the
glen of the Abana is pretty for some way above it. The weather was cold and
misty; the night we slept at Surghaya, it first blew and then snowed, and when
we woke in the morning we found the ground frozen hard outside the tent. In such
weather we were glad to take shelter in a clean room at Baalbee, instead of
tenting, as is the custom, in the temple enclosure. About midday the snowstorm,
through which we had ridden all the morning, passed over, and we had a fine
afternoon to visit the ruins. Magnificent as is the seale and superb as are the
architectural details of the great temples, we agreed in thinking the general
effect less impressive than that of Karnac.

The morning of April 6th was bright and frosty, and the chain of the Lebanon
shone out clear on the further side of the Plain of Coele-Syria. Its summits are
rounded and lack character, but the effect of the long snowy range against the
blue sky was very grand. Tucker and I felt it would never do to let a little
snow prevent our reaching the Cedars, and we therefore arranged to divide our
party into three sections. Williams and Cross started, with the boy who owned
their horses, to ride down the valley to Shetawara (pronounced ❛Stora❜), the
halfway station on the Damascus-Beyrout road; our baggage-train was ordered to
Shelfa, a village at the foot of Lebanon; while Tucker and I, with Elias and
Francois, set out for Ain-Aat, the highest hamlet (5,317 feet) on the eastern
side of the Cedars’ Pass. After crossing the plain we rode up a steep ascent,
clothed with dwarf oaks. Even below Ain-Aat the snow lay deeply in the hollows,
and gave our horses some trouble. We slept in a cottage, inhabited by a family
of about a dozen peasants, and an unknown but very appreciable quantity of
insects.

Ain-Aat is situated on a shelf immediately under the backbone of the Lebanon. We
started for the Cedars at 5 A.M., with Francois and a villager, leaving Elias
behind. It took one hour and forty minutes’ sharp climbing, up a steep but
perfectly easy snow-gully, to reach the ridge (7,624 feet), whence we looked
down on the Mediterranean. So far the snow had been in excellent order, but on
the western side of the pass, the horseshoe of mountains, within the Lollowof
which the grove of Cedars stands, had shut out the sun, and prevented the surface
from ever melting sufficiently to form a hard crust by regelation. Getting down
to and up again from the grove was one of the heaviest three hours’ work I ever
did. We sank at every step up to our knees. The trees are in very flourishing
condition, and well repay a visit, especially when seen, as we saw them, with
the snow vesting on their broad-spreading branches, the only green things
visible on the great white slopes. The little chapel was almost buried in snow,
and it was only just possible to get in at the door. On our return we met
several parties of villagers, who seemed equally surprised and pleased to see
travellers capable of walking over a mountain-pass. We were back again at
Ain-Aat at 12.15 P.M., and in the afterroon rode down to Shelfa, a
prettily-situated hamlet at the foot of the mountains. There we found our tents
pitched, and a good dinner cooking. I have described our visit to the Cedars, in
order to show that there is often no difficulty, to men of active habits, in
making the excursion when the dragomanic world of Damascus pronounces it quite
impossible.

A day’s ride through Coele-Syria brought us to Muallakah, in the neighbourhood
of Zahleh, the most flourishing Maronite town in the Lebanon; there we slept,
and on the following day cantered along a fine road, constructed by a French
company, which crosses Lebanon at a height of 5,175 feet. The scenery reminded
me, at times, of the lower parts of the Italian Tyrol. Beyrout was hot and hazy;
we never saw the summits of Lebanon clear till the last day of our stay, but
then the bay was really beautiful.

Elias during the last three days, when Tucker and I were alone with him, grew
more confidential than was his wont, and treated us to the story of his early
life. A native of a village in the Lebanon, he had been left an orphan at an
early age. His father had been a man of some property, and the riches Elias
inherited enabled him to indulge to the full his boyish taste for smart dress.
To this he soon added a passion for donkeys, and gave large sums for animals of
the best breed and most showy appearance. A fall, caused by the stumbling of one
of his favourites, disgusted him with donkeys, and he took to horseflesh. The
pursuit of this last fancy had brought him almost to the end of his inheritance,
when he was aroused to a sense of his position by the sneers of his former
friends. Elias sold his stud, and started afresh, until, having amassed
sufficient capital to set up as a dragoman, his love of horses and out-of-door
life led him into that profession. He had now, he told us, succeeded in buying
back most of the property he had sold in his youth, and was a well-to-do man.

Having paid oft Elias, and arranged for the despatch of our Damascus purchases,
to which we added some specimens of the work of the Lebanon, we embarked on
board an Austrian steamer, and finally bade adieu to Syria, on the afternoon of
Easter Sunday, April 12th.

Next morning we landed at Larnaca, the chief port of Cyprus — a dull ugly town,
where we failed in our search for good wine or pretty faces. Many of these
classical places have nothing left but their associations. The west end of the
island and the Bay of Baffa (the ancient Paphos) are well seen from the sea. On
Wednesday morning we had two hours in which to run over Rhodes, a most
interesting old town, full of monuments of the Knights Templars. Sailing on all
day under the lee of the Isles of Greece, we found ourselves at sunrise on
Thursday steaming up the Gulf of Smyrna; the shores looked fresh and beautiful,
but the water was sadly discoloured by the recent floods of the Hermus. 

Smyrna, like Alexandria, brings into vivid contrast the East and West; Paris
fashions and bearded camels come into constant collision in its narrow streets.
At the theatre a French company was performing ❛La Belle Héléne.❜ Homer's ghost
can scarcely view with pleasure his heroine in the hands of Offenbach. Our stay
at Smyrna — where, owing to the kindness of friends, we enjoyed most agreeable
society, and the comforts of an English home — was a very pleasant interlude
between the mild roughing of Syria, and the real hardships of travel in the
Caucasian provinces of Russia. 

Ionia, into the interior of which we made two short excursions, is as far
superior to Syria in scenery as Kent is to the Pays-de-Calais. Our first
expedition was to Aidin, a large and flourishing town, charmingly situated under
the hills on the north side of the valley of the Meander, over which there is a
lovely view from the neighbouring heights.

Next day we returned by rail to Balachik, and rode thence to the site of
Magnesia ad Meandrum: the broken columns of a temple arc the principal remains,
and there was nothing to compare with what we had recently seen in Bashan; but
the ride was delightful, amongst tall olives and fig gardens. Our classical
recollections were aroused by meeting a boy playing the primitive Pan-pipe, and
by seeing a pretty fountain at which a bevy of nymphs were bathing. We got back
to Aiasalook (the station nearest Ephesus) in the evening, and were kindly
housed and entertained by Mr. Wood, who has spent some time in excavating the
ruins, with a view to the discovery of the site of the famous Temple of Diana.
Before his excavations, the ruins of Ephesus left above-ground had suffered too
severely, from time and violence, to be of great interest to anyone but an
antiquarian; much, however, has now been brought to light. The theatre, the
scene of the goldsmiths’ riot, is the most striking sight; the stage has been
laid bare, and many inscriptions have been found. Some of the recently excavated
marbles are as white as on the day they were cut. The city was built mostly of
brick, encased in various marbles, of which fragments strew the ground in every
direction. Mr. Wood has also discovered a small building, which, on the strength
of some Christian symbols, he rather boldly calls the Tomb of St. Luke; a marble
basin of noble dimensions, and a sort of ❛Via Sacra❜ outside the walls, lined
with sarcophagi and funeral inscriptions. When we were there he believed himself
to have settled, within a square mile, the position of the Temple of Diana, and
seemed quite confident of turning it up sooner or later.

Our second excursion was to Manissa (Magnesia ad SipyJum), a fine Turkish town
built on a steep slope at the base of the splendid erags of Mount Sipylus. We
drove on several miles, in a Turkish cart, to see the statue called Niobe, a
rude figure, probably of Egyptian origin, carved on the face of a cliff. On the
way we had a distant view of a fine snowy mountain, Boz-Dagh, far away in the
interior, beyond Sardis. We returned to Smyrna the same evening.

On Saturday, April 25th, we left Smyrna on board an Austrian steamer for
Constantinople. The boat was crowded with Russian pilgrims returning from
Jerusalem who occupied themselves alternately by eating salt-fish and fighting;
hideous females, perpetually smoking cigarettes, were strewn all over the deck,
and from time to time neglected infants raised dismal howls. Happily the sea was
calm what the state of things must have been during the run from Alexandria to
Rhodes, when the vessel encountered a severe gale, it was easy but not pleasant
to imagine. The poor pilgrims had been terribly frightened during the storm, but
were now rather elated, as they attributed their safety to the prompt piety of a
man who threw into the waves a taper lit from a candle kindled in its turn from
the sacred fire in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre on Baster Sunday.

We entered Constantinople at sunrise on Monday, and admired, as everyone must,
the enchanting aspect of the city from the water. We spent six days at the Hotel
de Byzance, during which we were fully occupied in sightsecing, and making the
necessary arrangements for our journey in the Caucasus. Of course we did the
❛lions❜; were first hurried round the mosques, perhaps the most tiring day’s
sightseeing in the world; and afterwards paid a quiet visit, by means of
❛backsheesh❜ to Santa Sophia, which more than realised our expectations. While
admiring the effect of the vast unbroken area under the dome, even when merely
dotted with the bright dresses of Turkish worshippers, we could form some faint
idea of what must have been the splendour of a state ceremonial of the Byzantine
Court in this noble basilica. The old walls, the seven towers, the burial-ground
at Scutari, all had to be visited.

One evening we were recommended by a gentleman, staying at our hotel, to visit
the Persian Khan, to hear the wailing for Hassan. We found a long room decorated
with buffets covered with ornamental glass and candlesticks. On the floor
squatted at least 700 highcapped Persians; in the centre of the room was a low
pulpit, from which a Mollah recited the piteous tale of Hassan’s death. When he
came to an exciting point in the story, the audience wept and beat their
breasts, or ❛oh-oh'd❜ their indignation against the murderers, like an election
mob hooting an unpopular candidate. Excellent coffee and sherbet was handed
round to everyone, including our own party, who had been given seats in a recess
commanding a full view of all the proceedings, and were treated in every way
with great civility.

Our row in a caique to the Sweet Waters was welltimed. May-day, the date when
the picnics at the Sweet Waters usually begin, fell on Friday, the Mahommedan
day of rest, so that the concourse was greater than usual. Our caique jostled a
crowd of boats filled with Turkish ladies, plump little dolls who make
themselves fair to look upon by adding artificial brightness to their eyes, and
wearing transparent veils over the lower part of their faces. Their
balloon-shaped dresses, mostly of the brightest colours, present a charming
*coup-d’oeil* when massed in groups. The Sultan has a villa up at the Sweet
Waters, which consist of a stream (about the size of the Cherwell at Oxford)
with a drive on one side, and gardens on the other. The place is just pretty
enough to make it an excuse for a promenade, whether by road or water. There
were many European carriages and Parisian costumes on the drive, the latter far
more extravagant than anything the East can produce.

We were lucky in meeting at Constantinople Mr. Gifford Palgrave, H.B.M.’s Consul
at Trebizonde, who was on his way home. When consul at Soukhoum-Kalé, Mr.
Palgrave made several journeys into the interior, and had been twice to the foot
of Elbruz; he was consequently able to give us much valuable information as to
the character of the country. But the most important aid we received was the
recommendation of a Mingrelian servant, who would act as our interpreter. The
need of some such attendant, and the difficulty of finding one who would fall in
with our plans, had long been a weight on our minds. The man Mr. Palgrave
suggested to us was a native of Sugdidi, between Kutais and Soukhoum-Kalé, and
had been employed as cook in the consular household at Trebizonde. He spoke
French, Russian, Turkish, and Georgian. 

I presented, at the Russian Embassy, the letters of introduction which had been
forwarded to me from England, and received from General Ignatieff much
politeness. He gave me letters to Count Leverschoff, the Governor of Mingrelia,
and to a gentleman attached to the Grand Ducal court at Tiflis. We were warned
that the country was still in an undeveloped state, and that we should find
rough roads and meagre fare, but were also told that the worst danger to which
we should be exposed from the mountaineers was having a horse stolen.

On May 1st we parted from our friends Cross and Williams, who sailed for Italy;
and on the following afternoon embarked, with all our traps, on board a Russian
screw-steamer, which looked very small in contrast to the large boats in which
we had voyaged of late. She was named the ❛Gounib,❜ after the scene of Schamyl’s
last resistance and capture in Daghestan. The boat was built more for freight
than passengers, and the accommodation was very scanty. Tucker and I were lucky,
however, in getting a comfortable cabin to ourselves, owing to the courtesy of a
Russian officer, who exchanged his berth with one of us. The deck was littered
with all sorts of odd passengers, bound for the ports of Asia Minor. The way in
which an Eastern, immediately he gets on board-ship, spreads his rug, wraps
himself round in his cloak, and resigns himself to destiny and seasickness, is
worthy of all praise. The vessel was delayed so long before the mails came on
board, that it was dark before we got under weigh, and we saw but little of the
beauties of the Bosphorus. Passing the lighthouse which marks the entrance to
the Black Sea, we watched the steamer’s head swing sharply round to the
eastward, and felt that we had abandoned the ordinary track of travellers, and
that a new stage in our wanderings had indeed been entered upon.

:::