# CHAPTER IV.<br /><small> TRANSCAUCASIA.^[^0400]^ </small>{#four .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
On the Black Sea — Trebizonde — Rival Interpreters — Paul — Running a Muck —
Batoum — The Caucasus in Sight — Landing at Poti — The Rion Steamer — A Drive in
the Dark — Kutais — Count Leverschoff — Splendid Costumes — Mingrelian
Princesses — Azaleas — The Valley of the Quirili — A Post Station — The Georgian
Plains — Undercround Villages — Gori — First View of Kazbek — Tiflis — The
Hotel d’Europe — The Streets — Silver and Fur Bazaars — Maps — German Savants —
The Botanical Garden — The Opera — Officialism  Rampant — A false Frenchwoman — A
Paraclodnaia — The Postal System in Russia.<br /><br />
::::

THE weather on the Black Sea was cold and rainy, but the water was never really
rough. Half our fellow-passengers were English — an engineer with his wife, and
two young men going out to aid in the construction of the Poti-Tiflis railroad.
Our other companions were a young Russian colonel, a little man who talked
familiarly and affectionately of ❛votre John Stuart Mill,❜ on the strength of
his having read his ❛Utilitarianism❜ and some Armenian merchants, more or less
uninteresting.

On Monday we called at Samsoun, and on Tuesday afternoon arrived at Trebizonde,
where the boat remains twenty-six hours to take in cargo. The weather was vile,
the rain falling like a waterspout, and we were glad to escape from the rather
rough and monotonous Russian fare, and the uneasy roll of the steamer, to a nice
little hotel on shore, kept by an Italian, who had served in the Sardinian army
during the campaign in the Crimea. No sooner had we acquainted the landlord with
our plan of travel, than a candidate for the post of interpreter appeared in a
good-looking man, showily dressed in Caucasian costume. His acquirements, by his
own account, were marvellous; he spoke perfectly at least seven languages,
including English. We thought he was too much of a dandy to appreciate such
rough work as we meant to undertake, and were moreover unpleasantly reminded of
dragomanic tyranny by his way of saying. ❛I am sure you cannot get on without
me; you will be very sorry if you do not take me.❜ We fortunately had an easy
answer to his importunities in our previous understanding with Mr. Palgrave, and
we started off through the rain to find the dragoman of the English Consulate,
for whom we had letters. He at once sent for the Mingrelian whom Mr. Palerave
had recommended to us. He was a handy-looking fellow, young and active, dressed
in ordinary European clothes, and he was quite ready to accept such an
engagement as we offered him; so a bargain was at once struck with him, and he
promised to be ready to start on the following day.

:::: { .wrap-90 .caption .break-before}
![&nbsp;](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0074.jpg ""){#b074} 
::::

On Wednesday we had a pleasant walk to an old Byzantine church, mutilated and
whitewashed by the Turks, outside the town. Trebizonde itself is a picturesque
place. Its houses rise in terraces above the water, on the lower slope of a bold
green hill, backed by finely-shaped, well-wooded mountains. The modern town has
spread along the coast on either side of the old fortress, the walls of which
are still perfect; two ravines, which cut it off from the adjacent slopes, make
it a very fine and strong position. The great article of manufacture seems to be
wooden cradles, very gorgeously decorated; we saw store after store full of
them. The bazaars are well stocked with game, among which we noticed some
woodcocks, from the neighbouring hills. When we were there the place was very
quiet, but shortly afterwards its peace was disturbed by a tragic incident. A
Mussulman fanatic, either mad or drunk, took it into his head to run-a-muck
through the bazaar, and so far succeeded in his horrid purpose, as to stab no
less than seventeen people before he was himself waylaid and despatched with a
poleaxe by a discreet butcher. Eleven of his victims died of their wounds. These
outbursts of fanaticism sometimes occur among a Mahommedan population, but they
are quite exceptional phenomena, and as a rule your person and pocket are far
safer in an Eastern city than they are in London.

In the afternoon we climbed by a steep path to the Flagstaff Hill, behind the
town, which commands a very good view of the coast and the mountains of the
interior. The brow was covered with the most wonderfully smooth turf, like an
English lawn. On the way down we turned aside to visit a very curious rock-hewn
church, decorated with frescoes, some apparently of great antiquity, We left at
6 P.M., and at daybreak next morning were in the harbour of Batoum. The weather
had cleared during the night, and, to our great surprise and delight, we found
ourselves for the first time in the presence of the ❛mystic mountain range❜ of
which we had talked and thought so much, but of which we as yet practically knew
so little.

As we looked from the deck of the steamer, our eyes followed a long line of
snowy peaks, the most western of which rose directly above the waters, like a
ship at sea when only its white sails are visible. Next to these came a cluster
of fine rocky peaks, which reminded me of the Dolomites as seen from Venice; in
the centre the outlines were tamer, but on the east was a very massive group,
probably Koschtantau and its neighbours, which stand midway between Elbruz and
Kazbek. The harbour of Batoum is the only safe one at this end of the Black Sea;
it is formed by a long spit of sand, which runs out in a northerly direction,and
the bay faces the north-west. The town stands on low ground, and is poorly
built; it is only some twelve miles distant from the frontier fort of St.
Nicholas, and it seems curious that, in some of their accessions of territory on
this side, the Russians have not managed to obtain possession of the harbour,
which would be of great value to them. Poti, at present the port of
Trans-Caucasia, is a most miserable place, and the bar of the Rion is so shallow
that no vessel of any size can cross it. All the Black Sea steamers,
consequently, either stop at Batoum or Soukhoum-Kalé, and transfer their cargoes
into smaller boats. The steamer which ought to have met us had not arrived, and
we were compelled to spend the whole day at Batoum. At a brook in the outskirts
of the town we found several men engaged in capturing frogs: no sooner were the
victims secured, than they were beheaded and skinned; a revolting spectacle from
which we quickly fled. Crossing, by a ruinous wooden causeway, the swamp which
intervenes between Batoum and the hills, we climbed up a projecting knoll
covered with rhododendrons in blossom, and crowned with beech-trees. The vistas
of sea and coast through the trees were exquisite. A hamlet built on the
hillside reminded me of the pictures of South Sea island habitations; it
consisted of huts built of rough interlaced wood plastered with mud, surrounded
by quaint little square boxes raised upon poles, and looking like young chalets
starting for a stilt-race. I believe they are used for storing corn. We made
provisional arrangements with the Russian consul at Batoum to remedy our
Mingrelian servant’s want of a passport, and were much amused by his name, which
proved to be Bakoua Pipia. Pipia was the family title — Bakoua a term of
endearment which he had acquired as a boy. We preferred to call him by the more
familiar appellation of ❛Paul❜ by which he had gone when in European service. In
the afternoon time hung heavy on our hands, and, having exhausted our last
❛Saturday Review,❜ we had recourse to a *café,* kept by a Frenchman, which
offered some bad beer and an atrocious billiard-table.

Towards evening the little steamer arrived from Poti. It had been detained to
aid a vessel, laden with the ironwork for the railroad bridges, which had stuck
on the bar. No certain intelligence could be obtained as to when we should
start, and we were finally allowed to turn in with the impression that we were
not to be disturbed till the morning. The captain, however, changed his mind,
and at midnight we were awoke, and told to go on board the small boat. Meantime,
Francois and Paul, in preference to sleeping on the deck, had gone ashore to
seek quarters in the town, and no one knew where they were to be found. We sent
off men to go the round of the lodging-houses, and promenaded the quay
ourselves, shouting their names and ❛jödelling❜ at the top of our voices. All
was in vain — no trace or sign of the truants was to be had. The little vessel
got its steam up, and we were obliged to go on board. Of course we complained
loudly to the officers of their mismanagement in first giving notice that we
should not leave till morning, and then routing everybody out of bed at
midnight. While we were venting our indignation, the ropes were cast loose, and
the paddlewheels began to revolve; we had actually gone a hundred yards when a
movement took place on the shore, and the burly outline of Francois was seen
standing like Lord Ullen, when left lamenting on the waterside by his heartless
daughter. I made a last energetic appeal; the engines were stopped, and the lost
ones were brought off rapidly in a boat. Francois nearly tumbled into the water
in his hurry to get on deck, and both men looked, as they well might, very
sheepish and ashamed of themselves.

It was about 2 A.M. when we got off from Batoum. The cold soon drove us below,
but we came on deck again at sunrise, so as to lose nothing of our approach to
the Caucasian shores. The steamer was running quickly across the fine bay which
forms the eastern end of the Black Sea: behind us lay the ranges on the Turkish
frontier, grand masses rising to 8,000 or 10,000 feet in height, carrying at
this early season, and after an unusually inclement winter, a great quantity of
snow, but still clearly mountains of the second class; before us rose ridge
behind ridge, until behind and above them all towered the peaks of the central
chain of the Caucasus, scarcely telling their height to the eye uninitiated in
mountain mysteries, but showing us plainly enough that we were in the presence
of an array of giants, armed in like panoply of cliff and ice to those we had so
often encountered in the Alps. One great dome of snow, which conspicuously
overtopped all its neighbours, we hailed at the time as Elbruz, and I do not
doubt we were right in our recognition of the monarch. On our right lay a low
wooded coast, the basin of the Rion; a group of twelve vessels anchored about a
mile off shore, and a tall lighthouse marked the mouth of the river and the
position of Poti. The meeting of the fresh water and the salt was most curious;
the Rion is at all times a muddy stream, and the line between the brown and blue
water was marked sharply enough to be visible from a considerable distance. The
town lies about half a mile up the Rion, on the southern bank; we ran up
alongside a wharf, close to the custom-house — a long log-building, where our
luggage was very leniently examined, and our passports were taken away; we were
told they should be sent after us to Tiflis. There is no restriction against
bringing arms into the country. We had expected, on landing in Russia, to be
struck, after the universal untidiness of the East, by the appearance of a
well-dressed European soldiery, but, to our surprise, the men we saw were clad
in worn-out grey suits, and were physically of the most wretched appearance.
Partly owing to the exertions of our companion the Colonel, the departure of the
river-boat up the Rion was delayed until passengers from the Black Sea steamer
could get on board, and after a stay of only an hour and a half, we left Poti
behind us; I shall therefore postpone its description till our return, and at
once carry my readers up the country.

The voyage up the Rion from Poti to Orpiri occupies eight hours, and on a clear
day, such as we were favoured with, is most beautiful. The stream, a short
distance above its mouth, makes several bends, each of which discloses a
charming vista. Thick forests clothe the banks; and over the trees glitter the
peaks of ❛the frosty Caucasus.❜ One summit, exactly at the end of a long reach
of the river, strikingly resembled in form the snowy side of the Grivola. On the
right we had always the Turkish ranges, which sink in beautifully-shaped hills
into the basin of the Rion. For the first four hours of our voyage, both shores
were covered with primeval forests, and the country was low and swampy, the only
signs of life being a few log-huts, or a Mingrelian horseman riding past. One
man raced the boat for some way, and we had time to remark his costume. The most
striking part was the long frock-coat, the breast of which was decorated with a
row of cartridge-pouches; and the ❛baschlik,❜ or Caucasian hood, with two long
tails, used to wind round the neck in case of wet; this, with the big sheepskin
cloak common to the country, forms a most efficient protection even against an
Eastern deluge. The stream, averaging from 200 to 300 yards in width, now bent
to the south; the forest became thinner, and the country more inhabited, while
orchards, fields of Indian-corn, and clusters of cottages, appeared on either
shore. The lowest outposts of the southern hills here advance close to the Rion,
above which they rise in steep banks covered with fine timber. Our little
steamer contained a good saloon, where an excellent dinner was served to a very
mixed company. The most marked characters at table were a French baron, absent
from home for political reasons, who had been down to Poti to fetch two of
Ransome’s ploughs for his farm near Kutais, a fat roaring Mynheer-van-Dunk of an
official, connected with the postservice, and the captain of the steamboat, a
little scrap of a man, who did his best to be polite to a very rough English
engineer, incapable of speaking any language but his own, and labouring under
the suspicion, for which he probably had sufficient grounds in Russia, that
everyone was taking advantage of him in consequence. The amiable captain paid
severely for his politeness to our countryman, in being compelled to swallow a
tumbler of porter, as a proof of the sincerity of his sentiments.

Before reaching Orpiri, we noticed, on the hillsides, the road which runs to
Fort St. Nicholas through the district of the Guriel, celebrated for the
personal beauty and picturesque costumes of its inhabitants. The stream was
exceedingly rapid, and the steamer had some difficulty in cutting her way past
the mouth of the Zenes Squali or Horse River, the largest affluent of the Rion.
The villages of Orpiri and Meran stand on either bank. The former — a cluster of
wooden cottages, at one of which food and even beds may be obtained — is on the
right or northern banks. At Nakolakevi, in this neighbourhood, some antiquaries
believe that they have discovered the site of the ancient Aea, whence Jason
carried off the golden fleece. Those who wish to read a rationalised view of the
early legends of Colchis, and whose feelings can support the intelligence that
Jason was, in fact, only the first man who made a rush to the diggings, and that
Circe was Medea’s niece, a very discreet young lady, who put Ulysses’ companions
into the police-station because they got tipsy and riotous, but let them out on
the entreaty of their insinuating and polished commander — will find all this,
and much really valuable information besides, in Dubois de Montpereux’s
❛Caucase.❜ Meran is the place of banishment of the Scoptsi, a religious sect
whose tenets enjoin self-mutilation. There is no mistaking the appearance of one
of these men, who have all the look of loutish old boys; their faces resemble
one another, and change little with years. They are said to make honest and
intelligent servants, a rare article in Mingrelia, if one may believe the
universal report of European residents.

Our voyage ended at Orpiri, whence a diligence starts in correspondence with the
steamer to carry on the passengers; but all the places had been secured by
telegraph, and not being provided with a ❛podorojno,❜ or order for posthorses,
we were obliged to seek some other mode of getting on to Katais. A peasant’s
wagoon was the only resource; in this we packed ourselves and luggage, and at
6.30 p.m. started to gain our first experience of road-travelling in Caucasia.
Our vehicle was a long and narrow trough covered with a tilt, and had no springs
or seat. It was drawn by three horses, which however did not drag it at any
great pace. The road was level and straight, and as we jolted slowly along,
bumping over every stone, we all in turn felt a weary, and wished we were in bed.
Sometimes we passed a village where the lights showed that the people were still
awake, and we often met waggons, similar to our own, journeying in the opposite
direction; between times there was nothing to divert our minds from the
perpetual croaking of the frogs, till, like Dionysus in the play, we wished they
and their ❛quack❜ might perish together, by a fate similar to that we had seen
inflicted on their brethren at Batoum.

Halfway, one of our horses had to be shod; this caused further delay, and we
only reached Kutais at 1.30 A.M. A slight descent leads into the town. Passing a
barrier, and crossing the Rion by a fine bridge, beneath which its waters
gleamed in the moonlight, we drove up to the Hotel de France, where, after our
week’s confinement on board steamers, we were glad to install ourselves in a
large and comfortable bedroom.

We spent the next two days at Kutais in roaming about, and making arrangements
for the drive to Tiflis. where we were anxious fo arrive as soon as possible, in
order to catch some of the officials and residents to whom we had letters,
before they all dispersed for the summer to the numerous retreats in the hills,
whither they fly from the heat of the Caucasian capital.

The situation of Kutais, which stands at the point where the Rion emerges from
the hills into the plain, is extremely pretty, although the low wooded eminences
which surround the place shut out entirely the snowy chain. The view looking
southwards, across the Rion basin to the ranges on the Turkish frontier is, in a
favourable light, very beautiful. The main part of the town, including the
bazaar and the public gardens, is on a level space on the left bank of the
river. The houses ave all new within the last twenty, and most of them within
the last ten, years; the streets are straight, and the shops, fitted up with
glass windows in the European style, are under arcades. The principal native
articles of manufacture seemed to be silver-work (of which, however, the display
is inferior to that at Tiflis), jet, and quaint-coloured chests. A hatter’s shop
at Kutais is wonderfully brilliant, owing to the variety and gorgeous character
of the headpieces worn by the inhabitants. The shops seemed well stored with
European goods, from saddles and flasks, to opera-glasses, goloshes, and
cosmetics. We failed, however, to discover any of the famous Circassian cream,
of which Western ladies have been known to request friends starting for the
Caucasus to bring back a store, in the belief (I need scarcely say unfounded)
that it is really a product of this country.

We walked out to a botanical garden which has been established on the opposite
bank of the river: here there are shady walks and a greenhouse; and although its
present attractions are limited, it will no doubt develope into a very
interesting collection of the trees and plants of the country. In the afternoon
I called on Count Leverschoff, the Governor of Mingrelia, who was living in a
prettily-situated villa outside the town, on the Tiflis road. He was most
polite, promised a ❛crown-podorojno,❜ and advised us to send to the postmaster
and order a carriage. The postmaster kept Paul for two hours, and then sent him
away with a message that he had no carriages at home, and that we must wait for
the next diligence, which did not leave for four days. Unaccustomed as yet to
the difficulties attendant on all negotiations with post-officials, and deluding
ourselves with the belief that a ❛crown-podorojno,❜ was treated with some
respect in Russia, we were both surprised and indignant at the reply, and I
returned to the Governor, to inform him of the result of my inquiries. I was
shown into a room most gorgeously decorated in Eastern style; the windows, still
unfinished, were draped with Persian carpets, hung as tapestry; others were
spread over divans, and one of the walls was decorated with a trophy of
Caucasian arms, from amongst which a chamois-head looked down on us. I was
promised that the hitch at the post should, if possible, be got over, and
received some useful information as to the mountain districts. The Count told me
that we should find the Ossetes (a tribe living on the north side of the chain,
in the valleys round Kazbek) the ❛gentlemen❜ of the Caucasus; and that Suanetia,
the name given to the upper valley of the Ingur, was the most primitive and, in
some ways, most interesting district in his government. He spoke in the most
glowing terms of the scenery of those parts of the country which he had visited,
and of the defile of the Dariel, the beauties and horrors of which the Russians
are all fond of descanting on. From a postal map, which he kindly got out, I
discovered that seven passes were laid down over the main chain between Kazbek
and Elbruz. One of these, the Mamisson — running up the valley of the Rion to
its eastern source, and thence descending along the Ardon to Ardonsk, near
Vladikafkaz — is a well-known route, and a carriageroad has been traced, though
never completed, over it. Of the other six, some at least, as we found
afterwards, are mere glacier-passes, used only by the people of the country. All
this information was quite new to us, for, during the short time at our disposal
before leaving England, we had not succeeded in finding any account of the
country between Kazbek and Elbruz, and our programme of ascending those two
mountains, and following out the main chain between them, was based only on the
German maps of the Caucasus which we could obtain in London.

On Sunday morning the postmaster came to call on us, to say that he had one
carriage at home, which should be prepared if we liked it. We went to inspect
the proposed vehicle — a long-bodied trap, something like a Swiss ❛bergwagen,❜
which had been disused for some time, and left out in the rain; consequently a
small hay-crop was growing inside. The framework, however, seemed solid, and the
necessary repairs being promised, we settled to start next morning. This was the
first illustration we had of the extraordinary mismanagement of the post-yards
in the Caucasian provinces. Every carriage, as soon as it gets out of order or
often before, instead of being repaired or kept under a shed, is left to rot and
to fall pieces in the open air.

We amused ourselves during the day by strolling about the outskirts of the
place, which consist of detached dwellings surrounded by little gardens, and
entered a Russian church, where the singing was remarkably good. On the hill on
the western bank of the Rion, behind the great hospital which overlooks the
town, are the ruins of a very fine Byzantine cathedral. Four lofty pillars,
still remaining, once supported a central dome. The porch, now fitted up as a
chapel, is very curious, and we remarked the ram’s head introduced into its
sculpture, as though the legend of the Golden Fleece had been known and
appreciated by its builders. In the graveyard near is a very pretty monument, a
small bronze angel raised on a pedestal.

On our return we found Count Simonivitch, the policemaster of the district,
looking out for us: he proposed to make arrangements for horses for our use on
the morrow, if we wished to visit the old monastery of Gelathi, some five miles
distant; but we were anxious to arrive at Tiflis, and declined his kind offer.
The Count proved an exceedingly pleasant acquaintance, and amused us much by his
account of journeys in which he had accompanied Sir Henry Rawlinson, for whose
knowledge of languages he seemed to entertain a great respect. Amongst other
anecdotes, he told us of a curious superstition still prevalent in Armenia. In
that country (I have forgotten the locality) is a well named after St. John,
which is venerated even by the Kurds. When the locusts eat up the land, a child
—too young to have committed any deadly sin — is let down into the well, and
brings up a cup of water. The holy water thus procured is scattered over the
fields, and in a few hours a miraculous flight of birds arrives, and eats up the
locusts.

The public garden at Kutais is a plot of ground the size of a large London
square, with walks down the middle, and a few trees, but no flowers; it is, in
fact, like an unkempt piece of the Regent’s Park. On Sunday afternoons, when a
military band plays, it becomes a most amusing promenade, owing to the immense
variety of costumes which meet the eye. In this part of the world fashion runs
wild in head-dresses. There is first the hideous Russian military cap, white,
bulging at the top, and much like a baker’s, which some of the inhabitants have
the bad taste to adopt: then there is the tall sheepskin hat, like a lady’s muff
set on end, with a round cloth cap, generally scarlet, to crown the edifice;
this has a smaller and humbler relative of the pork-pie order, of the same
family is the Tartar cap, conical in form, like a sugarloaf. Besides these the
poorer peasants are to be seen in every variety of felt wide awake, from a
bell-shaped fancy article, with gilt braid and a button on the top, which looks
as if it had been stolen from the great Panjandrum himself, to an almost
shapeless picce of battered material. But the two most characteristic headpieces
have yet to be mentioned — the ❛baschlik,❜ and Mingrelian cap. The first is a
cloth hood with long flappers attached, and is used by both sexes. The men wear
them plain, but for the ladies they can be made as gorgeous, with gold
embroidery, as the fair owner pleases. When worn with the hood over the head,
and the flappers allowed to fall loosely down the back, they give a man the
appearance of Touchstone in the play, but the native oftener binds the ends up
into a happy combination of a fool’s-cap and turban. The Mingrelian cap is a
small oval-shaped piece of cloth, or with the higher classes of embroidered
velvet, stuck on the back of the head, and fastened by strings under the chin.
It is about the size of a fashionable lady’s bonnet, and I am disposed to think
that some Parisian milliner must have been thus far, and carried home the idea
for future use.

A curious legend, illustrating the thievish character of the race, even in the
first century, is recounted at Kutais, as an explanation of the origin of this
peculiar headpiece. The story runs thus: — St. Peter, who is said to have
visited the Black Sea shores, and first preached the Gospel there, was one day
travelling through the Mingrelian forest. The saint was on foot, the heat was
great, and the road long; he threw off his hat and shoes, and, lying down under
the shade of a spreading beech-tree, fell fast asleep. Before long two natives,
a Mingrelian and an Imeritian, rode by. They observed the sleeping saint, and
the first idea which suggested itself to their profane minds, was to see what
they could get out of him. He had no silver belt, not even a dagger, but the
discarded hat and shoes offered an obvious booty. The Mingrelian secured the
hat, the Imeritian the shoes, and the pair hurried off. Some time afterwards St.
Peter awoke, and discovered the robbery of which he had been the victim. Finding
his property irretrievably lost, he had recourse to the natural consolation of
cursing the thieves, which he did in the following form: ❛May the posterity of
him who has taken my shoes go for ever barefoot! May no son of the man who has
got my hat ever wear one on his head!❜ From that time no Imeritian peasant has
ever had a pair of shoes on his feet, no Mingrelian a sufficient covering for
his head.

All the townspeople, except the Russian officials, wear the long cloth
frock-coats, reaching considerably below the knees, and confined at the waist by
handsomely-worked silver belts, to which are suspended silver-sheathed daggers.
The row of cartridge-pouches on the breast, which is *de rigueur* even for small
children, is made a vehicle for much tasty ornament, and the binding of the coat
and silk undershirt is often of silver or gold braid. This costume gives an air
of immense height to the really tall and fine men, whom we often met promenading
in twos and threes. The poorer folk cover their shabby garments in great
sheepskin cloaks, and struck us as a sleepy inoffensive-looking people.

The women show their half-civilisation by the harsh mixture of colours in their
dress. They are distinctly a handsome race, with fine eyes and good complexions;
but after the bloom of youth has passed, their features sharpen, and assume a
shrewish air, which bodes ill for the peace of their husbands. We saw many faces
which might have served as models for Medea, who, as some of my readers may
recollect, is described by Propertius as a native of Kutais. The hideous fashion
of wearing a great plait of hair, or two corkscrew ringlets, over the cheeks,
detracts much from the charms of the modern Mingrelian belles, and the
unfortunate spread of civilisation has led them into imitations of Parisian
costumes which, as they are out of date by at least three years, are likely to
find but little favour in a Western eye. Large crinolines, of the stiffest make,
were in full vogue, and a devoted husband — surely in his honeymoon —was seen on
one occasion riding home, with his dagger and sword at his side, brandishing
proudly in his hand an iron framework, destined to support the heavy skirts of
his spouse. The only trace of local costume worn by the ladies, besides the
❛baschlik,❜ is a Greek cap fastened on the back of the head by a lace veil or
handkerchief.

Count Leverschoff has the reputation of being a man of progress, and, with the
assistance of his wife, has done much to promote the welfare and gaiety of
Kutais, by encouraging balls and theatricals, making all officials wear their
uniforms in the streets, and instituting a military band in the gardens. It was
curious enough, among such a company, and after an impromptu burst of wild
harmony, or (to speak the truth) discord, from a party of country-folk, to hear
the band strike up the familiar Mabel waltzes.

The hotel at Kutais is fairly comfortable, and English tastes are well
understood, owing to the number of engineers who have been out here for the last
few years, to direct the works of the railroad now in course of construction
between Poti and Tifiis, which it is proposed to continue, at some future date,
as far as Baku, on the Caspian. The mistress is an untidy voluble Frenchwoman,
and, as we afterwards learnt to our cost, her promises are in no way to be
depended upon.

On Monday morning our trap arrived at the door, soon after the appointed hour.
For the first time in our wanderings, we assisted in making our own seats, by
twisting a piece of rope in and out of holes left for the purpose in the
framework of the carriage, and spreading our plaids on the top. Francois and
Paul had a wooden bench slung forward, and the driver perched where he could. It
was soon evident, despite Francois’ determined endeavours, that all our luggage
could not be carried with us; and we reluctantly confided our tent, with one of
the portmanteaus, to the charge of the mistress of the hotel, who promised
faithfully to forward them that evening, by a German carrier. The weather was
most lovely, and we set out in high spirits, for our vehicle had springs enough
to save us from any painful jolting, and the road, for the first two stages, is
excellent. Passing the Governor’s house, we emerged on to a common, golden with
wild azaleas in full blossom, the perfume of which was delicious. Sharp zigzags
led down the opposite side of the hill to a narrow stream, over which a new
bridge was being constructed. The road now ran over low wooded hills, the last
spurs of the Caucasus, and offered a succession of charming views towards the
Turkish or (to use a convenient name suggested by Mr, Palgrave) Anti-Caucasian
chain^[^0401]^ — large rounded mountains, not unlike the Tuscan Apennines. The whole
scenery was delightful, and the country vividly green and spring-like — a
striking contrast to the bare brown regions, too common in the East. The
azaleas, however, formed the distinguishing feature of the day’s drive; the
commons were bright with them, the oak-woods sheltered a dense undergrowth of
them, and higher in the hills their golden blossoms mingled with the purple
masses of the rhododendron, the white flower of the laurel and the hawthorn,
pale yellow brooms, and beds of the bluest forget-me-nots. We dipped into a
pretty wooded glen, and then came suddenly on the first station a low white
building, which overlooks the basin of the Quirili, a great tributary of the
Rion, believed by geographers to be the ancient Phasis, The postmaster was a
surly and impudent little monkey, and refused to give us horses, on the ground
that our ❛podorojno❜ was made out for two, instead of four persons. We
declined to bribe him, and eventually, by the threat of returning to Kutais, to
lay a complaint before the Governor, brought him to his senses. His object was
to make us take an extra cart with three horses for the servants, by which
manoeuvre he would have been paid for six horses instead of three.

The second stage was along the right bank of the Quirili, which now flows
through undulating country. Snowy peaks, bold in form but of no great height
(perhaps 11,000 feet), rose in the distance on our left. Near Simonethi, the
sccond station, we saw numerous clusters of the clean white tents of the Russian
soldiery. Up to this point the line from Poti will probably soon be opened; but
unless the works are pushed with greater vigour than is now shown, it will be
long before the iron road pierces the Suram chain, and reaches Tiflis. The
earthworks are being constructed by the soldiers, who, besides being, as a rule,
weak physically, are sufficiently enlightened to appreciate the principle of a
fair day’s work for a fair day’s pay, and naturally hold that two copecks a day
is amply repaid by a very little work and a great deal of shuffling.

The road now enters the Suram chain of hills, which separate the basins of the
Rion and the Kur, and form the watershed between the Black Sea and the Caspian,
and the connecting link between the Caucasus and the mountains of Armenia. The
Georgian highway, which is very rough and bad for several stages, follows to its
head one of the main sources of the Quirili, which has found itself a way
through a long and tortuous valley. The scenery consequently changes every
minute, and is additionally varied by frequent glimpses up lateral glens. An old
castle guards the entrance of the valley; higher up the vegetation becomes
richer; box, laurel, and bays clothe the banks, and the beech grows to a great
size. A steep hill leads up to a picturesque ivied tower, and a solitary house
stands on the opposite bank of the stream, which is suddenly confined between
bold precipices of limestone crag, beneath which the road passes. The defile
soon opens out, and the third station comes in sight. Here there were no horses
to be had, and after an inspection of the stable, to ascertain that we had been
told the truth, Tucker and I set off up the nearest and steepest hillside, to
while away the two hours we were obliged to wait. A climb of nearly 1,000 feet
up a sledge-track brought us to meadows where the hay had just been cut; we now
overlooked the lower hills, and had a good view of the finely-shaped peaks which
stand in a semicircle round the head-waters of the Ardon, and of an icy mass to
the west which we could not then recognise. We returned to the station, to find
the expected horses arrived and resting. At last we got them put to, and
started. The valley was much narrower; castles peered at one another, like the
cat and the mouse on the Rhine, from wooded knolls; and the road was driven into
close companionship with the foaming torrent by steep banks clothed in deciduous
forest trees. We gained frequent glimpses up lateral glens to the higher
snow-streaked ranges on the south.

Our horses were tired, and it was dark before we reached the fourth station,
fifty miles from Kutais. It was a wretched place, but there was no alternative;
so we stopped, and were ushered into a small room, clean, but furnished only
with a long bench. Ham was the only food we could procure; the posthouse itself
supplied neither tea, coffee, nor wine, but we got some very strange
effervescing drink, said to be made from grapes, at the village store. Although
Caucasian posthouses differ too much in their size and internal fittings to
admit of any very accurate general description, they have all one feature in
common — an absence of comfort paralleled in England only in second-class
railway refreshment-rooms.

*May 12th.* — In the morning our rug-straps were missing, a warning that honesty
was not a common virtue here, and at 5 a.m. we were obliged to depart without
them. The road, which from this place to Suram is very good, continues to follow
the narrow valley, although, leaving the stream, it winds along the northern
slopes, making from time to time a long circuit to cross the ravine of a lateral
torrent. The hills were covered with timber, resembling that of an English
copse, and the azaleas perfumed the morning air. Clusters of untidily built
wooden cottages crowned the knolls on the opposite side of the valley. We met
long files of camels carrying merchandise down to the seacoast; many of the
young animals were frisking about by the side of their dams, others, too young
to walk, travelled strapped on to their mothers’ backs, where they seemed more
comfortable than might have been expected. 

After changing horses at a village close to the top of the pass, we drove over
the green ridge, and looked for the first time into Georgia. The day was misty,
but I doubt if the view is ever very fine, as higher hills must shut out the
great chain on the north. The road, which had been well engineered for the last
stage, made itself supremely ridiculous in the descent to Suram, by wandering
aimlessly backwards and forwards on the hillside, in enormous and
ill-constructed zigzags, by means of which the bottom, with great waste of time
and trouble, is reached at last. Suram was in view from the top a small town,
gathering round a castle perched on a bold rock, which stands in the middle of
the valley. The station is beyond the town, at the junction of the branch-road
road from Borjom and Achaltzieh, which, in company with the Kur, here emerges
from the southern hills through a narrow glen. The aspect of the country had now
entirely changed for the worse. Instead of the varied landscape and rich
vegetation of Mingrelia, we had before us a rolling plain bounded by distant
ranges, so brown and bare as almost to make us fancy ourselves back in Syria
again, The ❛chaussée❜, as the Russians invariably call a regularly-made road,
had come to an end, and we wandered over the fields at our driver’s will,
selecting the least rough and muddy line of country there might be within a
quarter of a mile of the telegraph-posts, which marked our general direction.
The novel sight of village churches was, however, a source of interest. In
Turkey they are of course unknown, and, except at Kutais, we had hitherto seen
little external evidence of Christian worship in Mingrelia. We also noticed
villages of odd underground houses, or rather burrows, marked only by a brown
dome of earth, and approached by steps descending to a sunken doorway, somewhat
like that of an icehouse; a hole, lined with basket-work, serves as the chimney
to these dreary abodes, and, as Francois remarked, one of the little pigs which
swarm hereabouts might easily tumble down and be boiling in the pot before he
well knew where he was. Gargarepi is a large village buried in fruit-trees, with
a handsome church. The drive into Gorl was hot and dusty; the road crosses the
Kur, halfway, by a long wooden bridge. 

:::: { .wrap-80 .caption }
![A Georgian Church.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0096.jpg "A Georgian Church."){#b096}
::::

The station at Gori is on the right bank of the river, but the town lies about
half a mile distant, on the opposite side; It is picturesque, at a distance,
owing to the bold outline of the castle-hill, and the contrast of colours
between the cool grey of the houses, the bright-green church-towers, and some
red-roofed buildings in the foreground. We walked into the bazaar in search of
novelties, but discovered nothing specially worthy of notice, except a glass
paper-weight with the word ❛Balaklava,❜ and a picture of our Light Brigade
❛sabring the gunners there,❜ which one would scarcely have expected to find in
this part of the world. We visited a small chapel, built of ruddy stone, the
front decorated with a large carved cross. In the interior we were shown a
finely-illuminated missal, and a silver reliquary with figures of the Four
Evangelists. 

At Achalchalaki we forded a stream, which now covered only a portion of its wide
stony bed, and the track then took for a time to the hills on the southern side
of the Kur. The sky was clear, and, to our great delight, our constant search of
the northern horizon was rewarded at last by the first appearance of Kazbek. The
mountain towers far above all its neighbours, and, seen from the south, shows
two summits, of which the eastern is evidently the higher. We fancied it looked
loftier than any Alpine peak from a similar point of view, and made ourselves
happy with the belief that it was too large to be inaccessible on all sides. We
descended to a pretty village, surrounded by vines trailed in the Italian
fashion, and enlivened by a large encampment of railway workmen, a motley and
picturesque crowd of Persians, Georgians, Kurds, and Russians — each nationality
casily distinguishable by its peculiar dress.

We now entered a fine defile; the Kur, a smooth swift stream, flowed beneath us
in a deep bed, with cliffs on either side, perforated by numerous rock-tombs,
for which the most inaccessible positions had been chosen. Where the Dariel road
comes in from the north, over a lofty bridge, stands the posthouse of Mscheti,
the first one of Tiflis. The large building, with its extensive stabling, looked
so imposing in the dusk, that Francois fancied he must be at home again, and
wanted Paul to ascertain the hour of the *table-d’hote.* We had already driven
eightyeight miles, and, wishing to make our entry into Tiflis by daylight,
determined to sleep here, as we found we could get some dinner, and hire
mattrasses.

*May 14th.* — We had a drive of twenty versts (or nearly fourteen miles) between
us and Tiflis; the first part was exceedingly rough, as the new road and the
railway were both in course of construction, and the space between the river and
the hill being limited, carriages had for the time some difficulty to get along
anywhere. Mscheti, surrounded, after the fashion of the country, by battlemented
walls, stands on the left bank of the Kur, in a fine situation above the
junction of the stream which comes down from the Krestowaja Gora. Once a large
and flourishing town, it is now decayed, but contains a curious church, in which
many of the kings of Georgia are buried. A castle on an opposite height commands
the pass. When the hills retire, and the Kur bends southwards, Tiflis comes into
sight for the first time. A bare dull-coloured basin opened out before us, at
the end of which, about eight miles off, we could see the buildings of the city,
apparently crowded into a narrow space beneath the steep ridges which bounded
the view. A more unlovely spot at first sight it is impossible to imagine. The
road was nearly finished, but, with the usual Russian habit of leaving
difficulties till the last, several steep-sided gullies remained unbridged. Just
at the entrance to the town we passed a monument which records the upset of a
Czar, caused by one of these perilous descents. Rain began to fall heavily as we
drove down the long wide German-looking boulevard. A sharp turn to the left
brought us up to the door of the Hotel d’Europe, which stands in an open square
at the back of the opera-house, nearly in the centre of the town.

We had always looked on Tiflis as our depot and base of operations during the
summer months, and we were naturally anxious to ascertain what sort of quarters
we should meet with, as the hotels in Russian towns are not always pleasant
resting-places for those unaccustomed to the ways of the country. We were
therefore delighted to find that our host and his wife were French, and that the
house was fitted up in European style. The bedrooms were large and amply
furnished, and the beds had good spring mattrasses, instead of being (as usual
in Russia) mere sofas with hard leathern cushions, and a sheet spread over them.
Moreover, the master of the hotel was also the head-cook, and many of our
dinners would have done credit to a restaurateur of the Palais Royal; while
❛Madame❜ besides constantly attending to our comforts, was always ready to help
us in our final struggle with some greedy Georgian or Armenian, whose wares had
previously taken our fancy in the bazaars.

On this our first visit we spent a week at Tiflis; but after our return from
Persia, and again were setting out on our homeward journey, we made short halts
in the same comfortable quarters. I must now endeavour to throw together the
impressions which were the result of our several visits. Our first feeling was,
undoubtedly, one of disappointment. We had heard one way and another, while in
the East, a good deal oft he attractions of Tiflis, and now we found a town,
which consists of a Russian quarter roughly handsome, and ostentatiously
European, and two strangely incongruous suburbs, Persian and German. The covered
bazaars of the one are small and, after Damascus and Constantinople,
comparatively commonplace; the other is neat and snug, with its ❛biergarten❜
and band, where the German mechanic and ❛mädchen❜ promenade together, fondly
and dully, as if in their native archduchy. The environs of the town are
certainly not commonplace, but no one can call them beautiful. Bare green downs
lie on the left bank of the Kur, and over the town on the right rise steep
cliffs of clay, dried and parched up by the suns of many summers.

A better acquaintance, gained by many drives and rambles through the town,
greatly modified these first impressions. We found that the Russian quarter
contained many well-built private houses and excellent shops, and if the bazaars
did not make the outward show of Damascus or Cairo, there was no lack of
temptation to spend money within.

The first thing which struck us in the business quarter of the town was the
eagerness to sell shown by the occupants of the various stalls. In the East you
may generally stop, and turn over one piece of goods after another, and their
owner will not deign to interrupt the enjoyment of his pipe until you take the
first step by enquiring the price of some article. No such notions of etiquette
restrain the hungry-faced Georgian or Armenian artificers. After our first visit
to the Silver Row, our appearance was hailed by a crowd of eager merchants, and
we were exhorted, and beckoned to on all sides, by rivals for our custom. The
shop-fronts are about the size of a small cupboard, and in dark recesses behind,
the workmen may be seen hammering out objects similar to those which the master
offers you for sale. These are of a varied and attractive character: there are
silver-belts — some for men, consisting of handsome links of solid silver —
others for women, of lighter and more delicate workmanship. A common conceit is
to hang from them a model of a Caucasian dagger, the size of a penknife, neatly
cased in its sheath. The Georgian family drinking-cups are both quaint and
handsome: some consist of a cocoanut, mounted in silver-work, and furnished with
a long straight spout; others have a bowl entirely of silver, and a
curiously-twisted mouthpiece, with three funnels, which must, one would fancy,
be very awkward to drink out of. They are used chiefly as lovingcups at the
family picnic parties, to which the Georgians are much addicted. The bio ladles
and bowls, hammered out into quaint designs of birds, beasts, and flowers, are
also exceedingly handsome. The stalls belonging to one trade are mostly in the
same row; close to the silversmiths, the armourers and furriers display their
respective wares. Here we saw tiger-skins from Lenkoran, on the Caspian, hung
side by side with lamb-skins from Bokhara, and bear-skins from the neighbouring
mountains; and had offered for our inspection a choice of every size and quality
of dagger and sword, and every variety of flint and steel pistol and gun. One of
the traders boasted a medal obtained the previous year, at Paris, for the
excellence of his workmanship. The number of wine-skins exposed for sale is
another curious feature of the bazaars. The skins are of all sorts and sizes,
from that of an ox to that of a sucking pig. The wine kept in them is generally
Kakhetie, the produce of the grapes of the Telaw district, which is very cheap,
and is said to have the peculiar properties of curing gout and never causing
headaches. Despite these recommendations, the flavour imparted by the skins will
prevent most travellers from partaking largely of the commoner sorts. The best
quality, after being kept some time in bottles, is a full-flavoured wine much
resembling Burgundy.

We were struck with the entire absence of any Turkish element in the crowd, and
the consequent want of the bright fezzes which give such colour to the streets
of many Eastern cities. Their place is poorly supplied by the tall cloth-caps of
the Persians, or the conical sheepskins of the Georgian and Armenian merchants.
On the whole, we did not see such variety of costumes here as at Kutais. In a
town full of government offices the Russian uniform of course predominates, and
the number of unhappy creatures doomed to walk the streets with a sword always
dangling between their legs is very great. An occasional turbaned mountaineer
from Daghestan, or a handsomely accoutred Ossete, may of course be met, but here,
as at home, the domestic servants are pre-eminent for gorgeous apparel. A Tiflis
major-domo is got up regardless of expense; his belt and dagger-sheath are
massively wrought in silver, and his cartridge-pouches and fur hat are of the
most elegant and expensive kind. Such a costume costs from 25l, to 40l, Winter
is the Tiflis season, and then, I am told, the variety of dresses is really
marvellous. As it was, Georgian, Armenian, Persian, Russian, and German make up
a fair list of nationalities, and a member of each would probably be met with in
a five-minutes’ stroll.

One of our first business visits was to the Topographical Department, which was
in the same square as our hotel. From the officials there we met with unvarying
courtesy, and no difficulty was made in allowing us to purchase any sheets we
liked of the Ordnance or (as it is generally called, from being on the scale of
five versts to the inch) the Five Verst Map. We inspected with great interest a
beautiful relief model of the whole Caucasus, constructed on a large scale, a
copy of which has lately been presented, by the Czar, to the Geographical
Society of St. Petersburg; and we were also glad to add to our collection a
panoramic outline of the chain, giving the heights of the principal summits.
These works are most creditable to the officers engaged in them, especially when
the scanty time and means at their disposal are taken into consideration.

We had brought with us several letters of introduction, explaining the object of
our journey, to the officials attached to the Court at Tiflis, and we were
disappointed to find that the Grand Duke had already left for Borjom, his summer
residence, taking of course half Tiflis society with him. We were fortunate,
however, in meeting Monsieur Barthelemi, Attaché for special missions to the
Grand Ducal Court, who was living at the time in our hotel; and through his
kindness, we were introduced to the Russian and German gentlemen then resident
in Tiflis, who were best acquainted with the natural features of the country. We
had the good fortune to catch Herr Abich, on the eve of his departure for
Germany, from whom, in the course of a half-hour’s conversation, I obtained two
hints, which were both afterwards of the greatest service to us — namely, that
there was a very lofty névé-plateau, at the northern base of the summit of
Kazbek, and that Elbruz might be attacked, with good prospect of success, from
the glaciers at the head of the Baksan valley. Herr Radde, chiefly known in
England by his Siberian travels, although now settled in Tiflis, as curator of
the Museum of Natural History, which has been lately founded, has not given up
his roaming habits. He kindly presented us each with a copy of his work, ❛Die
drei Langhochthäler Imeritiens, Rion, Ingur, and Tskenis-Squali,❜ the fruit of
his wanderings in the southern Caucasian valleys. It is the first German book
which has been printed at Tiflis. The museum has not been long formed, but the
collection is already most interesting. Specimens of the geology, natural
history, the costumes, and household articles of the inhabitants of the
neighbouring regions, are grouped together as effectively as the limited space
will allow. The most striking object is a magnificent ❛auruch❜ from the
mountains west of Elbruz, a region which, now it has been depopulated by the
expulsion of the Tcherkessian tribes, will perhaps offer a safe asylum for some
years to come to this rare and noble beast. Two very well-stuffed tigers from
Lenkoran occupy the middle of a room, round which are grouped bears, chamois,
and bouquetins from the Caucasus.

One of the pleasantest of our Russian acquaintances at Tiflis was General
Chodzko, under whose superintendence the Government Survey and the ❛Five Verst
Map❜ of Trans-Caucasia have been executed. During the progress of the survey he
ascended Ararat, and remained camped for nearly a week a short distance below
the summit, engaged in scientific observations. The General had also made
attempts on Kazbek and Elbruz, but he laughingly admitted that mountaineering
had been with him rather a necessity than a pleasure; and he strongly dissuaded
us from wasting our time in attempting the higher summits, which, from his
experience, he thought would certainly each take us a month to vanquish. So
anxious was he to put us in the right way, that he drew for us an itinerary, the
fatal objection to which was that no one but a Russian could expect to survive
sixty miles a day, for five weeks, of posttravelling over the steppes, swamps,
and boulders which are called roads in the Caucasus. The General’s kindness did
not end here, for he constituted himself our ❛cicerone❜, and took us a round of
all the sights in Tiflis. From the Persian quarter we climbed, by a very steep
road, to the Botanical Garden, which is shown in a wrinkle of the monstrous
hill overhanging the town. The southward facing slope of a narrow glen has been
cut and built up into terraces, planted with rave trees and shrubs, and
connected by vine-trellised paths and flights of steps. Overhead head are the
ruined towers of the old Georgian castle: below, a stream, scanty in summer, has
worn a deep ravine, the bare hillside on the further bank of which lends a
charm, by contrast, to the fresh vegetation aud shade of the garden. There are
several shallow caves in the rocks which support the castle ruins, where the
townspeople used frequently to resort for family picnics, a kind of
entertainment beginning with a light meal and frequent passage of the
loving-cup, and carried on by story-telling, music, and dancing, until late in
the evening.^[^0402]^ The return home was a service of some danger, since the road is
exceedingly steep, and the drivers were apt to refresh themselves at a wine-shop
near the gates of the garden. Upsets and accidents used to be of frequent
occurrence, and perhaps this, in conjunction with the making of the new gardens
near the Grand Ducal palace, has served to render this pleasant retreat no
longer fashionable. A zigzag path leads up to the ridge, on the outmost crags of
which the castle stands. A wall runs along the top, and when the door in it was
unlocked, a grand general view of the city burst upon us. Directly below were
the straight streets and gaily-coloured houses of the Russian quarter, the
bright roofs of which formed a pleasant contrast to the cool grey of unbaked
bricks in the Persian town. In the distance we looked straight up the valley of
the Kur, to the wooded hills behind Mscheti, and (had it been clear) to the
snows of the great chain. Whenever this is free from clouds the double head of
Kazbek is o conspicuous object from Tiflis. It is seen, together with several
lower snow-peaks on its left, from the boulevard, and from many of the houses in
the town. General Chodzko pointed out the watercourses, made partially for
irrigation, but also to check the floods, which Tiflis is subject from the hills
above. After any heavy rain, torrents pour down every street, and we were told
it was no unusual thing for children to be drowned in the middle of the city. We
were next taken to the principal covered bazaar (an arcade about the size of the
Burlington), where the goods exposed for sale are mostly European. Below the
castle, and between it and a commanding spur of the opposite hills, also
fortified, the Kur is so closely confined between high banks as to be crossed by
two bridges of a single span. Tall houses, with balconies over the water, are
built on either shore, and the river, beaten back and turned at a sharp angle by
the right-hand bank, rushes away with a fine swirl of water, which must put a
stop to all navigation. Wood is brought down as far as Tiflis in large timber
rafts like those of the Rhine. We often admired the adroitness of the steerers,
but the Kur is not easy to navigate, and accidents sometimes happen. Near Gori
we had seen a crowd on the river-bank, and been told that a raft had capsized,
and two men were drowned. On the left bank of the river we visited an
interesting old church inside the fort I have mentioned, and a large building —
partly used as a warehouse, partly as offices by Persian traders. We returned by
the new bridge, a handsome stone structure of several arches, at one end of
which stands a statue of the Prince Woronzoff, who did so much for Tiflis,
Odessa, and the Crimea.

:::: { .wrap-80 .caption }
![The Georgian Castle, Tiflis.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0104.jpg "The Georgian Castle, Tiflis."){#b104}
::::

We went twice to the Opera, a pretty house in Moresque style, and heard ❛La
Traviata❜ and ❛Faust❜ very fairly performed by an Italian company, but what
amused us most was a farce, in which an English tourist played the principal
part. He was drawn, not after real life, but after the caricatures of the
boulevards, immensely tall, enveloped in a plaid, and with long sandy whiskers.
When he refused to fight a duel, because the pistols provided for him had not
been made at Birmingham, the mirth of the audience reached its climax. The rest
of the time, not occupied in making arrangements for our further journey, we
spent in some tempting shops of the European style near our hotel, where a
greater choice was to be found than in the bazaars, though the prices were
somewhat higher. Our window furnished an amusing lounge at spare moments, for
the wood-market was held in the square below, and from an early hour in the
morning it was filled with carts, drawn by scraggy buffaloes, and a constant
jabber of bargain and sale went on all day, wet or dry. Once we saw a funeral
pass: the coffin-lid was carried first, then the open coffin; the body was gaily
dressed, and covered with flowers, and the priests who accompanied it raised a
fine chant as the procession moved onwards.

We arrived at Tiflis on May 13th; but as Mr. Moore was not to join us till June
20th, we had five weeks at our disposal, and determined to employ them in a run
into Persia, combined with a visit to and, if possible, an ascent of Ararat.

Before we could feel ourselves in order for this journey, much had to be done.
Only those who have been in Russia can understand how officialism may be brought
to bear on every detail of travel, and a man must go to the Caucasus to
appreciate how a great system like the Russian post, which would be admirable if
carried out properly, can become, by imperfect organisation, and gross
incapacity and dishonesty on the part of those employed, a positive hindrance to
travellers.

Our most important needs were to have our passports properly signed for leaving
and re-entering the Russian dominions, and to obtain an order for horses,
without which it was useless to make enquiries at the post. Mons. Barthelemi
kindly came to our aid, and offered to introduce us to the Governor of Tiflis,
who received us most cordially, and promised that all necessary documents should
be prepared forthwith. In due time, we received special passports for leaving
and re-entering Russia, a ❛crown-podorojno,❜ good for all Trans-Caucasia, and an
order for a Cossack escort wherever it might be needful. On Monday morning I
sent Paul to the post, to order horses for the next day, and to ask some
questions about the different kinds of carriages and their cost. He returned
with a message, that we might perhaps have horses in two days, and no answer to
my enquiries about carriages. I immediately drove to the post; the postmaster
was for once at home, but was excessively offhand in his manner, and tried to
walk away while I was talking to him, a manoeuvre only prevented by my placing
myself between him and the door. Fortunately, I had occasion to see the Governor
that evening, and I took the opportunity of calling his attention to the way in
which a crown-order was treated by minor officials. My remonstrance at
head-quarters had its effect, and no further difficulty was made in providing us
with horses; but as to a carriage, our Russian acquaintances agreed in advising
us to reconcile ourselves to the carts of the country, and their reason
afterwards appeared in the fact, that the road, halfway to Erivan, was for the
present impassable for spring-vehicles; and that we should, therefore, according
to the rules of the post, have paid for our carriage without having the use of
it. Meantime day after day had passed, and still our luggage did not arrive from
Kutais. We were consequently obliged to make up our minds to start without our
tent or our mountaineering boots, which we had hoped to make use of on Ararat.
Our ice-axes, however, of which we had brought out only the heads and spikes
from England, had, under Francois’ supervision, been mounted by a French
workman, and were now ready for use. The weather was not brilliant, we were
annoyed at the non-arrival of our luggage, and the appearance of the trap
provided for us by the postmaster of the Transcaucasian capital was admirably
adapted to render still more surly the ❛winter of our discontent.❜ 

A ❛paraclodnaia❜ (so great a name does the country cart bear in the Caucasus; in
Russia proper it is oftener called a ❛telega❜ ) is the ordinary conveyance of
the Russian posts, and the only one to be obtained at any but the largest towns;
even at so considerable a place as Erivan, nothing else was procurable. This
hateful vehicle is so bad as to be almost beyond description. The body of the
cart is sometimes flat-bottomed, like a punt — sometimes rounded, like a tub
boat; the boards of which it is composed are ordinarily rotten, and nails stick
out wherever they have a chance of injuring the clothes or flesh of the
occupant. The driver sits on a plank in front, while the travellers, if they
have any experience, carefully draw and tighten a piece of rope, through holes
left for the purpose, until a sort of cat’s-cradle is contrived at the back of
the cart, on which they spread their rugs and seat themselves. None but a native
could bear to lie on a quantity of hay at the bottom, and allow himself to be
jolted like a pea in a rattle. The body of the cart rests on two blocks of wood,
which are in their turn directly supported, without any intervening springs, by
four wheels of the rudest construction. There are, however. degrees of badness
oven in the framework of a ❛paraclodnaia❜; if the framework and the road are
ordinarily bad, the jolting is painful; if either is very bad, it is maddening.
The luggage, which is generally stuffed under the rope-seat, has, as well as the
seat, to be rearranged six or eight times a day, as the conveyance is changed at
every station. Nothing of glass can be carried without breakage, and if the road
be muddy, clothes and face are covered in five minutes with a thick layer of
dirt. Three horses draw these traps; the two tracehorses are quickly fastened on
either side; the centre animal goes between the shafts, and over its neck is
fastened the ❛duga,❜ or wooden arch, to which one or more bells are attached —
probably intended, by their incessant clang, to drown the groans of the
suffering travellers. Scarcely a stage passed without our having to stop in the
middle of it, to rearrange this clumsy structure, in the beauty and fitness of
which the native drivers seem to have implicit belief, and to which they attach
a sort of mystic importance.

Such are the carts which the Imperial Government provides for its couriers! Its
traditional policy seems to have been to develope towns, and supply every luxury
and amusement for a swarm of official drones; while commerce and industry were
discouraged by the neglect of the communications of the country, for which the
Government, by keeping in its own hands the entire management of the roads and
postal system, had made itself responsible. What provision it does make I have
endeavoured partially to show; but it would fill a volume to narrate all our own
experiences, and the stories we heard from other, and partly Russian sources,
both of the badness of the roads, and of the insolence, ignorance of truth, and
rapacity of the postal officials. Imagine a place like Tiflis, the residence of
a brother of the Czar, a town of 80,000 inhabitants, with a large European
society, and an opera-house, unconnected by any pretence of road with the Black
Sea coast, the Caspian, or the Persian frontier! A more enlightened spirit now
happily prevails in high quarters, and the Lieutenant of the Caucasus has
ordered the construction of roads to Kutais, and to Erivan, while the highway of
the Dariel is almost completed; but the dawn of intelligence is late, and light
spreads but slowly through the dense mists of jobbery and peculation which
impede, if they cannot stifle, the coming of a better day for this as vet
undeveloped region.

In no country has the transition from utter want of the means of transport to
the facilities of a large railway system been so sudden as in Russia, and the
extent of the change likely to be produced there during the next few years can
scarcely be exaggerated. Amongst its smaller results will doubtless be the
sweeping away of those petty but troublesome safeguards with which police and
post officials combine to hinder and render disagreeable all travel in the
interior of the country.

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0400]: [The political division of the Russian empire ruled by the Viceroy of the Caucasus, extends from the Manyteh, on the north, to the Araxes on the south. The provinces on the north of the great Caucasian chain are called Cis-Caucasia, those on the south Trans-Caucasia. Russians and natives of the country never restrict the name Caucasus to the mountain-range.]{.footnote}

[^0401]: [German geographers seem to have adopted the epithets Great and Little Caucasus, to distinguish the ranges south and north of the Lasins of the Rion and the Kur. — See Peterman's ❛Geographische Mittheilungen❜.]{.footnote}

[^0402]: [The Czar has a very pretty watercolour drawing of one of these parties in his study at Livadia, the Empress's Crimean villa.]{.footnote}
