# CHAPTER V.<br /><small> THE PERSIAN POST-ROAD. </small>{#five .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The Banks of the Kur — Troops on the March— A Romantic Valley — Delidschan — A
Desolate Pass — The Gokcha Lake — Ararat — Erivan — The Kurds — The Valley of
the Araxes — A Steppe Storm — A Dangerous Ford — Nakhitchevan — A Money Question
— Djulfa — Charon’s Ferry and a Modern Cerberus — A Friend in Need — A Persian
Khan — Marand — Entrance to Tabreez — Chez Lazarus.
<br /><br />
::::

WE left Tiflis on May 20th. The road, once clear of the rough pavement of the
capital, follows the valley of the Kur. The suburbs of Tiflis stretch far in
this direction, and the views of the town and castle from this side are often
striking. At the first station we got a better ❛paraclodnaia,❜ which, by bribery
and argument alternately, we contrived to keep for several stations, and we
further improved our condition by taking a second cart for the men, which was a
great boon, both to them and to us, as we had been sitting previously in a
terribly cramped position. The new high-road from Tiflis to Erivan, which will
run along the Kur valley, is yet unfinished, and we had to make a détour of four
stages, over low hills and high plains, before we rejoined the river. The steppe
was fortunately, for once, in fair driving order, and we made good progress. A
curious circular hollow, containing a lake at its lower end, is crossed before
reaching Kody, the second station, distant twenty-seven versts^[^0500]^ from
Tiflis by the road, but only twelve by the short cut over the hills, which we
made a great zigzag to avoid. At the third posthouse we crossed a small stream,
the Algeth, and stopped half an hour to lunch on cold turkey; for we had
profited by experience, and started well supplied with provisions. We now
followed, for some twenty-six versts, the valley of the Khram, a large tributary
of the Kur, which is principally fed by the streams from the Mokraja Gora, and
other chains which lie between Tiflis and Alexandrapol; their wooded summits,
broken here and there by castellated crags, formed the southern horizon. At the
Red Bridge we were delayed for want of horses. This brick structure, the centre
arch of which is of considerable span, is a relic of Persian rule, and is
probably the oldest in the country. It was repaired by Rostom, king of Georgia,
in 1647, and still remains perfect, although it is being slightly widened for
the new road. The Russian engineers must have been relieved to find so
substantial a structure ready-made, as bridge-building is not one of their
strong points, and they too often neglect either to make proper approaches, or
to direct the course of the stream with dykes. In consequence, their arches are
often left high-and-dry, with the water sweeping over the road a hundred yards
on one side of them. We had now returned to the Kur, which has here entirely
quitted the mountains, and entered on the dull green steppes, through which it
winds a weary way to the Caspian. Its bed, a belt of swamp and forest, is
considerably below the general level of the plain, which breaks suddenly into
it. This part of Georgia is exceedingly wild and thinly populated, and forms the
borderland of the steppe country, inhabited only by wandering tribes of
Turcomans and Kurds. We passed several underground villages, the existence of
which is indicated, at a distance, only by a brown blotch on the surface of the
plain; on nearer approach a low mound of earth, with perhaps a thin column of
smoke issuing from it, shows the position of each house.

The men wear the great sheepskin coat and the conical fur hat, the women dresses
of crimson-lake hue, which lit up wonderfully the dull green landscape. Every
half-hour we came to a weird group of ruddy tombstones, averaging six feet high,
and often delicately carved; they resemble upright sarcopaghi in shape. These
strange graveyards make much more show than the villages. Companies of camels,
their day’s work done, and their heavy cottonbales ranged in a circle, sauntered
lazily about in search of herbage. Gaily-feathered birds perched on the
telegraph-wires, which were our constant companions and guides, scarcely cared
to fly away as we passed. It was hard to realise that it was scarcely twelve
hours since we had left a town supplied with every European luxury.

The seventh station was a mere Tartar hut with a large underground stable. The
post-horses had first to be driven in from the steppe, and then harnessed; a
party of very merry-looking natives did both in less time than an ordinary
postmaster would have taken in examining a ❛podorojno,❜ and reflecting what he
should write on the back of it. Night was now coming on, and we quickened our
pace. Lighted by a rising moon we cantered over the plain, passed a large
stream, flowing towards the Kur, by a crazy bridge, and five minutes afterwards
alighted, stiff and weary, at the door of the large posthouse of Akstafinsk,
situated at the junction of the Erivan and Elizavetpol roads, and 110 versts
from the capital. Unluckily for us, a large detachment of troops, on a
roadmaking expedition, had halted here for the night, and the resources of the
house were employed in providing for the comfort of the officers, who occupied
all the accommodation. Under such circumstances we, who wore neither official
caps nor decorations, could not expect, and did not meet with, even the
commonest civility and thought ourselves lucky when the surly postmaster, with a
very bad grace, accorded us permission to roll ourselves up in our rugs on the
floor of his room — quarters which we shared with a huge dog conscious of fleas,
and consequently provokingly restless during the dark hours.

*May 21st.*—We were awoke from sleep, if the uneasy rest we obtained deserved
the name, by a most horrible discord, some idea of which might be obtained by
hiring itinerant performers on the bagpipe and barrel-organ to play different
tunes simultaneously, The soldiery were starting, and their drum-and-fife band
was cheering them on the road. I imagine that the dregs of the Russian army are
kept in Trans-Caucasia; anything more wretched and slovenly than the uniforms,
marching, and general appearance of these men we had never seen even in Turkey,
but the work in which they had been employed might account partially for their
unsoldierly aspect, as some of the Russian troops we saw afterwards were very
different.

We changed our direction to-day from east-south-east to nearly due south, and
entered a valley among the hills which separate Georgia from Armenia, the basin
of the Kur from that of the Araxes. Half an hour was spent in passing the troops
and their long trains of baggage-waggons. The road was narrow and bad, and our
driver timid, but at last we left even the vanguard behind. Our course lay along
the banks of the stream we had crossed over night, which were ornamented by
magnificent forest-trees, The morning was lovely, soft clouds were clearing off
the hills on the south, while the snowy crest of the Eastern Caucasus ran along
the northern horizon, rising beyond the Karaja steppes. The next time we saw it
was from the slopes of Ararat. The depression in which the river flowed
gradually narrowed and deepened, and after leaving the station where we first
changed horses, we fairly entered the hills, The track was rough, the pace slow,
and the jolting incessant. The second station was in a considerable village; the
houses, one-storied and flatroofed, were built up the hillside in an angle of
the beautiful valley, the windings of which we were now following. Up to this
point the scenery had reminded us of some of the more richly-wooded parts of
Wales on a larger scale — henceforth it grew bolder, castellated crags
alternated with forest-clad slopes, snow-streaked summits appeared in the
background, the stream danced and sparkled at our side; every prospect was
pleasant, and the road alone was vile. The mountain-sides were abrupt and
picturesque, and the richness of the vegetation suggested a comparison with the
neighbourhood of the Italian lakes. We were struck by a very curious
rock-formation, which at a distance gave the face of the cliffs and the porphyry
fragments strewed at their base the appearance of masonry.

At our third halting-place, a solitary house, no horses were to be had for two
hours. During our compulsory halt here we were amused by a struggle between a
horse and its master. The animal bolted into the stream to escape capture, and
was carried down for some distance by the force of the current; on regaining its
feet it came wisely to the conclusion that captivity was better than a watery
grave, and quietly surrendered to its owner. We walked on for five versts,
leaving the men to look after our traps. This stage was very heavy and hilly,
and even after our conveyances caught us up, we often preferred to walk, except
when for a few versts we had the advantage of a finished piece of the new road.
The valley now opened out, and everything showed we were approaching a more
elevated region. We passed a hamlet on the side of a pretty wooded basin, out of
which we climbed by a long ascent, and then wound along, or rather up and down,
the slopes into Delidschan, a large village situated at the foot of the pass
into Armenia, looking up a wide and somewhat bare upland valley, along which
runs the road to Alexandrapol. We had only travelled sixtyeight versts during
the day, but it was too late to cross the pass. The horrible jolting of our
carts had given us all headaches, and made us feel generally out of sorts, and
we had made up our minds to give them up and take to riding, which now indeed
became a necessity, as the stage over the mountain was impassable for carriages,
owing to the destruction of the old track by the works for the new road.
Delidschan turned out to be the destination of the troops we had seen in the
morning, and there was already a considerable force collected in the white tents
picturesquely grouped in the valley below. The evening was cold, for we were at
a height of 4,250 feet, and we were glad to solace ourselves after our fatigues
with a brew of mulled wine.

*May 22nd.* — Heavy rain was falling when first we looked out of window, and we
set about our preparations in a gloomy frame of mind. Our luggage was soon
packed on horseback, and, mounted on animals more used to draw than to carry, we
formed a very queer cavalcade when we started for the ascent of the pass. Paul,
like most of his race, was a good but rough rider, and bullied his beast, until
the animal plunging, and the saddle turning, gave our friend a tumble and a
lesson in moderation which was not unneeded. The road led up a lateral glen of
the valley we had left, through forests carpeted with cowslips, and past several
villages, untidily built of wood. On the bare slopes, near the top, we found the
soldiers at work; they were blasting a terrace for the new road, above the line
of the old, which was almost covered with the fragments sent down, amongst which
we had to pick our way under a desultory fire of small stones from above. The
watershed between the Kur and the Araxes is here a broad grassy ridge, on which
the snow still lay in patches; the rich herbage has given the name of the ❛Echak
Meidan,❜ or ❛donkey’s pasturage,❜ to the pass, from the custom of wayfarers
reward their beasts, after the labour of the ascent, by turning them out to
graze. It does not seem to command much view. For some distance we bore to the
right, with but little descent, until presently as much of the big Gokcha Lake
as the mists did not enshroud came into sight. Size seemed to be its chief merit
there was not a tree to be seen, the ground had a dull and sodden appearance
after the heavy rains, and the surrounding mountains, though many of them are
10,000 feet in height, produced but little effect from being seen over the broad
surface of a lake, itself 6,000 feet above the sea-level. The day was very
unfavourable, and the low clouds, which swept rapidly across the landscape,
added to its grim and desolate character. Here, as elsewhere, we noticed the
great difference between the northern and southern slopes of the Anti-Caucasian
chain. Allt he valleys facing northwards, towards the Kur, are full of luxuriant
vegetation; while the southern slopes, falling to the Araxes, are always bare,
burnt, and arid in summer, and swamps in the rainy season. Tucker’s horse
evidently had a dissipated owner; it made a dead halt at every drinking-shop on
the road, and its misdemeanours culminated at a village just below the pass,
where no persuasion could get the brute past a well-known halting-place, It was
not a pleasant spot to dismount, for the mud was deep; and finally, I had to
return, to withdraw ignominiously my friend and his misguided beast from the
scene of temptation. Unavailing as the hunting-whip he always carried had just
proved, it effectually took the bark out of two dogs that ventured to set up
derisive howls at the discomfited horseman.

Having reached a better piece of road, we trotted briskly on in pursuit of Paul,
who had been sent ahead to procure horses at the next station, leaving Francois,
a safe but not brilliant rider, to keep an eye on the baggage. The post-people
refused to give us ridinghorses, on the ground of having no saddles or bridles.
We had learnt by this time to be too glad to get on anyhow to argue the
question, and thankfully took possession of the miserable ❛paraclodnaia❜
provided us. The posthouse was close to the lake, along which our course lay for
the next stage. The shores are steep, and the road consequently climbs up, down,
and round the promontories, occasionally venturing on a pitch about the
steepness of an ordinary house-roof. A rocky island, about a quarter of a mile
from the shore, and a village built on a bold peninsula, are the only objects
which seem worthy of notice. Elenovka, situated at the west end of the lake,
where the shore is low, and the waters find an outlet, stands in a wide sea of
mud, with hovels, arranged more or less in the form of a street, scattered
amongst it. A strong odour of dried fish revealed at once the staple of
industry; the salmon-trout of the Gokcha Lake are famous, and are sent both to
Tiflis and Erivan. The postmaster was a Jew, and talked a little German; but he
had neither horses nor ❛telegas,❜ and did not seem to know when he was likely to
have them. After a delay of three hours we got two horses, and, with Paul as my
companion, I pushed forward, to make, if possible, all ready at the next station
as we were unwilling to give up the hope, faint though it was, of reaching
Erivan that night. Fancy the wildest, ugliest part of Wales in bad weather, with
mountains, swamps, and rainstorms all on an enlarged scale, and some feeble idea
may be formed of this part of Armenia, as we saw it. The track — a broad belt of
mud stretching across the swampy downs — was not difficult to find, despite the
driving mists; the carcase of a camel, or a dying horse, by the wayside, and the
telegraph-wires singing a quiet tune of their own overhead, sufficiently
revealed the whereabouts of what the Russians naively call a road, and
illustrated the happy definition we afterwards heard, ❛Une route de poste en
Caucase, c’est ou il y ni route ni chevaux.❜

A short descent brought us to Achta, after a ride of sixteen versts, during
which my steed and I, to my great surprise, did not once part company; as
trotting with a saddle about the size of a lady’s bonnet, and stirrups which
exalt your knees to the level of your face, is an exercise more sensational than
safe. Tucker, Francois, and the baggage arrived in due time, and we continued
our journey in carts. The stream from the lake, reinforced by contributions from
the western range, flowed in a deep depression on our right, while we continued
to traverse the swampy downs which spread round the base of Ak-Dagh. So deep was
the mire that we could seldom get beyond a foot’s pace, and it was dark ere we
reached the next station, a lone house standing in a hollow, near the base of a
conical hill of apparently volcanic origin. Soon after our arrival a
❛tarantasse❜ (a carriage with a hood and rough springs) drove up. Its occupants
were a gentleman, a member of a Greek firm at Teheran and Tabreez, who spoke a
little English, his wife, and a lady’s-maid. He told us that Mr. Abbott, the
English Consul-General, was at present at Urmia, but that we should find a
hospitable welcome at Tabreez from Dr. Cormick, the English physician in charge
of the heir-apparent of Persia, who holds his court at Tabreez. He also gave us
a note to an old servant of his firm residing at Djulfa, on the Russo-Persian
frontier, which proved invaluable. In return he asked for information as to the
road we had travelled. We were sorry not to be able to give a better report, as
he was considerably perplexed how he should get his wife and heavy baggage over
the pass. He started, however, next morning, to try his luck, and we afterwards
heard of his safe arrival at Tiflis.

*May 23rd.* — The station supplied a comfortless room, where I was privileged to
enjoy repose on a sofa which had once been stuffed; but as the middle had, by
some incomprehensible means, risen two feet higher than either end, my position
was somewhat constrained, and I envied Tucker his level, if hard, boards. The
morning was tolerably fine, and on starting we traversed uplands of the same
description as yesterday’s, only that we could now distinguish the snowy summits
of Ak-Dagh on the left, and Alagoz, with two summits about the size of the cone
of Piz Languard, perched on an enormously bulky base, on the right. In front a
rise of the around shut out all beyond. As we overtopped the brow, Ararat burst
suddenly into view — a huge but gracefully-shaped mass, rising to a height of
16,916 feet, from a base of about 3,000 feet. It stands perfectly isolated from
all the other ranges, with the still more perfect cone of Little Ararat (12,840
feet) at its side. Seen thus early in the season, with at least 9,000 feet of
snow on its slopes, from a distance and height well calculated to permit the eye
to take in its true proportions, we agreed that no single mountain we knew
presented such a magnificent and impressive appearance as the Armenian giant. I
can only compare it to the popular idea of Atlas — a huge head and shoulders
supporting the sky. One is ready immediately to admit that the Ark must have
grounded there, if it grounded anywhere in these parts.

Francois went off at once into somewhat Colenso-like speculations as to the mode
of the elephant’s descent, and how many years the tortoise must have taken to
reach the bottom; and he was scarcely satisfied with the suggestion that the
tortoise turned on his back and made one long glissade of it, while a ❛special❜
avalanche was engaged to transport the more unwieldy animals. As we thus
examined and talked over the mountain, we were glad to observe that, though
steep, it did not appear to offer any serious difficulties; still the quantity
of snow was so great that we decided to postpone our attack on it till after our
return from Persia, when we might hope to find the weather more settled, and the
slopes in better order for an ascent. Already we fancied we discovered a ❛Grand
Mulets❜ in a rocky teeth which projected from the eastern side of the greater
peak, and anathematised anew the faithless Frenchwoman at Kutais, by whose
carelessness in failing to forward our mountain-tent we were likely to be
prevented from sleeping at so great a height. After we had gazed our fill at
Ararat, we noticed that away to the west spread the broad upper basin of the
Araxes, bounded by the snowy mountains of Armenia and Kurdistan. The last
station before Erivan, perhaps an old caravanserai, stands in a most picturesque
gap, the rocky sides of which serve as a frame to the stupendous snowy mass of
the two Ararats. We were required to write our names and nationality, by an
officer of unusually courteous manner. A few versts more, over bare downs, where
herds of camels were picking up the scanty herbage, or kneeling with lugubrious
grunts to receive their loads, brought us to a large village on the verge of the
last steep descent into the valley. Thence we got our first view of Erivan; a
grey flat-roofed town, nestling under the shelter of the hill we were about to
descend, and embowered in groves of lime and acacia — a pleasing contrast to the
bare plain around. We were driven through its wide streets, which have the
unkempt air of most provincial Russian towns, to the post-station; but not
liking the quarters there, we insisted on returning to the ❛Gostenitza Ararat,❜
where we found a tolerable room, clean beds, and excellent food, including even
such luxuries as coffee-ices. Erivan is a place which belongs to no one
nationality, but shows in its buildings, and still more in the crowd in its
streets, the traces of several. Two-storied stone houses, wide streets, an
abundance of town-carriages, and an untidy public garden, where a military band
performs every evening, mark the presence of Russian rulers. The bazaars are
thoroughly Eastern, and a stroll through them will be sure to afford some
amusement. The large open space between the public garden and the fortress was
always crowded with camels and bales of merchandise. The principal mosque,
standing on one side of a quadrangle, is covered externally with blue tiles,
which give its minaret a very bright appearance. There is a certain Persian
element about the place, which manifests itself most prominently in the
paintings with which any blank space of wall was decorated: here of a company of
highcapped horsemen, there of strange wild beasts, amongst which the Persian
lion — a near relation of our red lions at home, with a sword in his paw, and
the sun rising out of his back — took the first place. Russian, Persian,
Armenian, Kurd, and Tartar jostle one another between the stalls, and it is
strange to reflect on the different pasts, and probable futures, of the races
they represent. Now you pass an Armenian priest or merchant, distinct in type
from the Russian — like the Greek clever and successful as a man of business,
and renowned throughout the East for his sharp practice, and yet, also like the
Greek, incapable of combining to form a wise polity, and insensibly yielding to
his destiny, soon to be merged with the slower but more steadfast Russian. By
his side may be seen the Kurd chieftain, from the slopes of Alagoz, or Bingol
Dagh, armed with a round leather shield and dagger, Turk or Russian, as suits
his convenience — in reality paying neither allegiance nor dues to any man, and
looking what he is, the free Arab of the mountains. The strong pressure from
without is producing some sort of union amongst the Kurdish tribes; they are
constantly reinforced by emigrants from the Russian side of the Araxes, and, if
we may believe one who has had long experience of Oriental races, it is to them
we must look for the continuation of the struggle against the northern flood,
which has now finally swept over the Caucasus, and is breaking round the slopes
of Ararat.

In the afternoon we called on the governor of the province, who spoke excellent
French, and showed a desire to render us all the assistance in his power. We
learned that the Araxes was impassable, which of course confirmed our intention
of postponing our visit to Ararat. The governor gave us letters to the commander
of the district of Nakhitchevan, and the Colonel of Cossacks stationed at
Aralykh, the frontier-post on the further side of the Araxes, at the foot of
Ararat. This letter we hoped to use on our return from Tabreez. We sent Paul to
endeavour to procure some kind of spring-vehicle, but no such thing was to be
had in Erivan,

*May 24th* — We were off at 4.30 A.M., in the usual ❛paraclodnaia❜ both the
carts and the road were horrible for the first four stages. The ruts in this
part of the world run across, instead of parallel with, the track, and in
consequence inflict a series of short sharp jolts on the unlucky traveller,
During the second stage we passed between a succession of orchards and
vineyards, nourished by a careful system of irrigation, which has made this part
of the Araxes valley like a great garden. These vines are locally reputed to be
descendants of these planted by Noah after the Deluge, and some support is given
to this tradition by the fact that the juice is still famed among the Russian
officers for retaining the peculiarly intoxicating quality it possessed in the
days of the Patriarch. From Kamirlu, a large village where the track to Aralykh
turns off, the view of the two Ararats, now close at hand, is superb. The Little
Ararat, on the left, is a perfect cone, looking a volcano all over; the higher
mountain rises from the gap between the two summits, in a long slope, broken,
about 3,500 feet below the top, by a huge rock-tooth. The snow-dome falls away
gently towards the north for some distance, and supports a large névé-plateau,
below which the mountain breaks down steeply for several thousand feet.

:::: { .wrap-100 .caption }
![Ararat.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0124.jpg "Ararat"){#b124}
::::

We now left cultivation behind, and drove at will over the grassy steppe,
passing every now and then a group of Turcoman tents, large and comfortable
erections. A sheet of dingy canvas forms the roof, while the sides are
constructed of wicker-framework, hung with gay-coloured carpets, woven by the
women. During the fifth stage, we passed through a curious gap in a range of
hills, which ran out from the barren chain on our left, and came in view of a
broad lagoon formed by the flooded Araxes. Clouds had been for some time
gathering round Ararat, and now slowly detached themselves, in black masses,
from its sides. We noticed, first, apparent puffs of smoke on the further side
of the valley; then a pillar, as of cloud, rose into the air, and swept towards
us across the Araxes; with it came the howling wind, lashing up the waters of
the lake; and a minute afterwards, we were overtaken by a storm of rain, which
laid the dust-cloud which been its forerunner. The storm did not last long, but
it made a great impression on us at the time, though it was a trifle to one we
afterwards encountered. In the worst of the wind and rain, our driver pulled up
short, and jumped down to secure two bales of serge which had fallen from the
back of some overburdened camel, and lay on the steppe the prize of the
fortunate first-comer. The driver of the second cart claimed his share of the
booty, and we were obliged to insist on their postponing the argument of the
case until our arrival at the next station. There we received the unwelcome
intelligence that it was 140 instead of 80 versts, as we had previously
believed, from Erivan to Nakhitchevan, and that immediately before us lay a
large river, now dangerously swollen, which it was doubtful whether we should be
able to cross.

Reflecting that, in the present state of the weather, the stream was more likely
to be larger than less next morning, we determined to take our chance, and
declined to follow the rustic policy of waiting till the river should sink,
recommended by Francois, among whose strong points fording of rivers was not
included. We very soon came to the brink of a formidable-looking stream, but our
driver was plucky, our horses faced the water bravely, and, piloted by a native
horseman, we emerged safely on the further bank. In the same way we crossed a
second branch of the river, and were just congratulating ourselves on the ease
with which we had vanquished the enemy when the third and last branch came into
sight, as big as the other two put together. Before venturing on the passage we
confided the saddlebags, now our only luggage, to a horseman who was to precede
us, and took off our boots and socks, in case the water should come into the
cart. The stream before us was 100 yards wide, and was coming down from the
hills in lumps of brown water. Fortunately, we had plenty of assistance in our
difficulties, from a band of natives who were on the look-out to earn some
honest copecks. One rode alongside, to direct and cheer the horses; two others,
half-naked, hung on to the side of the ❛paraclodnaia,❜ which met the force of
the stream, and helped to prevent our being borne away.

When all was ready we plunged in. The stream, four feet deep, poured through the
cart, but the horses fought gamely, and we soon found ourselves in shallow
water, in the centre of the flood; another plunge, another sharp but short
struggle, and we were landed in safety on the further hank. As we looked back on
the cart containing Paul and Francois, still surrounded by the water, the burly
form of the latter, standing erect, to escape wetting, reminded us ludicrously
of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, as represented in children’s Bible-pictures. After
distributing a well-earned ❛backsheesh❜ among the men who had aided us, we
pursued our journey over the wide dull plain. Our driver was, in more ways than
one, a cool hand; and having done his business so well in the passage of the
river, seemed to consider he was now entitled to take his pleasure, which he did
by deliberately pulling up at a halfway house, and keeping us waiting while he
took a glass of ❛vodka❜ and smoked a pipe. As rain was again beginning to fall
heavily, our patience did not endure long, and having captured our sybarite, we
induced him to hurry on to the next station, which was in sight, on a low hill
at the further end of the plain. On arrival we were met with the dismal
intelligence that there was nothing to eat, but, like most official assertions,
this turned out not to be strictly true; and Paul succeeded in unearthing new
milk, tea, and eggs — so that, with the chickens and cheese we had brought from
Erivan, we made no bad supper. If the sleeping accommodation had been better, we
should have had no reason to complain. In this, however, lies the cardinal
defect of the Russian post-stations; in no single one of those between Tiflis
and Djulfy, a distance of 300 miles, can a mattrass or a blanket be procured for
love or money. The eye, in its despairing search for creature-comforts, is met
by a wooden framework with a sloping board at its head, representing the pillow
of civilised life. This is the couch awaiting the traveller, weary with 100
versts of road, which have given him a horrible headache and a pain across the
chest, and made every joint in his body stiff and sore. Stretched on one of
these barbarous contrivances, he shifts himself restlessly from side to side:
and if he is so lucky as to snatch a short slumber, still urges in his dreams
the inevitable ❛paraclodnaia❜ over the interminable steppe. Unwieldy as such an
article is to carry, a mattrass of some sort is a necessity in travelling in the
Caucasian provinces. 

*May 25th.* — The morning was clear, and the two peaks of Ararat, now well
behind us, and brought almost in a line with one another, looked very imposing.
Two stages separated us from Nakhitchevan; the first of fourteen versts, we
accomplished in fifty minutes. The ground was soft, and the disagreeables of
jolting were exchanged for the doubtful pleasure of being plastered with mud.
The track led up and down over bare hills; every few miles we came to a Cossack
station, one of a chain extending all alone the Persian frontier. Nakhitchevan
is a small and decayed town, built on a high brow which overlooks the basin of
the Araxes; it boasts of a large but now ruined mosque, a governor, a
passport-bureau, and a custom-house. We first sought the untidy but not
illsupplied military restaurant, where we got a good breakfast, and a bottle of
Allsopp’s beer. Wherever there are Russian officers quartered, there is at least
a semblance of European cookery, and European cookery is an excellent thing
after a course of post-station fare. We next presented our letter to the
governor, a stout man, whose final cause, as far as we could make out, was to
serve as a receptacle for Russian decorations, the rage for which, in this
country, reminded us constantly of the South Sea Islander’s passion for a coat
with brass buttons and a cocked hat; the same instinct prompts both. He told off
two Cossacks to aid us in crossing the streams which still intervened between us
and Djulfa.

Officialism is very rampant at Nakhitchevan. Our passports were long retained
and anxiously studied by clerks of every degree. After being led from
custom-house to police-office, from police-office to custom-house, for nearly
two hours, till our patience was wellnigh exhausted, we were curtly asked by an
official, ❛how much money we had got?❜ Being by this time fairly irritated, I
answered, as curtly, that he might find out. Our inquisitor persisted, and it
was not till the officials found we could be as obstinate as they were, that
they condescended to explain that a convention existed between Russia and
Persia, by which all money that had been registered before leaving the Russian
territory could, if lost by robbery on Persian soil, be recovered from the
Shah’s Government. As the custom-house is twenty-five miles distant from the
actual frontier, the money has to be registered at Nakhitchevan, where it is
tied up (in the present instance in my pocket-handkerchief) and sealed with the
double eagle, not to be broken until the moment before the ferry-boat leaves the
Russian soil. This is the official story; the real object I believe to be, to
prevent the exportation of Russian silver, which is scarce enough already. When
treated with civility, we made no further difficulty, and handed over our cash.
Our Napoleons puzzled the officials greatly, their value being utterly unknown
to them; indeed, I believe they hadnever seen gold before, and the discovery of
some ❛Victor Emmanuels❜ in the roll added greatly to their perplexity. At last
the formalities were completed, the Cossack escort arrived, and we started for a
forty versts’ drive to the frontier-post. At the foot of the hill on which
Nakhitchevan stands we encountered a stream, which, though troublesome, was
nothing after our sensational feat of the day before. It had been more than
enough, however, for some Armenians, whom we met just before we reached it, and
who by exhibiting their soaked state tried to dissuade us from attempting the
passage. One of our Cossacks was conducting a prisoner, whom he drove at the
trot — probably some Persian who had committed a theft, or come across without a
passport, and was being relegated to his own country. The poor wretch was allowed
to mount in one of our ❛paraclodnaias,❜ for which he was very grateful. We waded
for fifteen versts across a plain more than half under water, and then passed
over a low chain of hills, beyond which we came to the second river,
comparatively a small one, on the further bank of which stood the solitary
posthouse. The whole scenery of the Araxes valley is wild, not to say dreary;
but it is so utterly unlike anything we are accustomed to in Europe, that it has
at least the charm of novelty. The landscape now grew more and more savage.
Ararat, which had long served as a kind of familiar landmark in this, to us,
unknown region, was lost to view behind lower hills. In front a wild confusion
of mountains gathered round us, amongst which towered one huge and, as one would
have said before the fall of the Matterhorn, inaccessible rocky mass, tower-like
in form, and rising at least 3,000 feet above its base. The Araxes is here
obliged to force its way through a gorge in the hills, and the tributary we had
just crossed has a similar task. The track follows its channel, between two
walls of sandstone rock, and it is necessary twice to ford the stream. We had
barely effected the first passage when the off-forewheel of our crazy vehicle
fell to pieces. Had it done so a minute earlier, both we and our luggage would
have been drenched, and, as the current was deep and strong, probably seriously
injured by the accident. Fortunately, we were only some six miles from our
destination, and the road was smooth; so we crowded into the remaining cart, the
harness of which instantly gave way under the extra strain, but was promptly
repaired.

As we trotted quickly down the long slope which leads to Djulfa, we amused
ourselves by contrasting our wretched trap and magnificent escort. Had our
carriage been a little better, we might have fancied ourselves royal personages,
with an outrider cantering in front, and two Cossacks trotting on either side.
The Cossacks here have no fixed uniform; their dress is a conical Tartar hat, a
cloth coat, generally blue or brown, a silk shirt coming down to the knee, and
long leather boots with turn-up toes. They carry a more or less extensive
armoury, but none have less than a sword, gun, and pistol. On the road they
amused themselves and us by feats of horsemanship. One of them was particularly
clever in picking up his gun from the ground without dismounting, and with
apparent ease. These men neither rise in their stirrups English-fashion, nor sit
close like the Arabs, but trot for hours, alongside the ❛telega,❜ in a standing
position. We afterwards made trial of this mode of riding, and Tucker asserts
that he found it a grateful change from the ordinary style, to which a Tartar
saddle, short, narrow, and hard, is certainly very ill-adapted.

Djulfa, the most southern outpost of the Russian Empire (at least on this side
of Bokhara or Samarcand), is situated at the climax of the wild scenery of the
Araxes; it might be the frontier-post of the habitable world, and the entrance
to some other region, such as the ancients imagined Hades. A treeless plain, of
a dreary brownish-grey, slopes down to the Araxes, which flows out from behind
rugged hills, through which it has forced a way by some hidden cleft. Behind us
were the low red hills, and the gap through which we had come; before us a bold
mass projected from the higher chain on the Persian side of the river, which was
reft by a gap exactly opposite, and corresponding to, that by which we had
entered. To the north-east, where one might have expected to look down the lower
valley, the view was suddenly barred by a grand snowclad range, the summits of
which towered 10,000 feet above our heads; their lower slopes were as arid and
desolate as those above the Dead Sea. The only signs of life were the two
customhouses on the opposite banks, and a few miserable buildings clustered
round each. When we reached the river’s edge, and gazed on the ferry-boat, now
rendered useless by the flood, and the frayed and worn-out rope, which scarcely
saved it from being borne away towards the Caspian, the similitude of Hades, the
Stygian flood, and Charon’s tub, was yet more forcibly recalled to our minds. On
our explaining our thoughts to Francois, he carried out the idea with his usual
readiness, and replied ❛Oui, monsieur, et je pense que le voyage en enfer se
fait en paraclodnaia❜ — an allusion to our late sufferings which gave us a
hearty laugh.

Our vehicle pulled up before the door of the one good house, where travellers
are generally received by the officer in charge of the station. We were about to
enter, and ask for a room and beds, when we were met in a most chilling manner
by a man in uniform, who informed us that this was not the place for us, and in
answer to our enquiries, ordered a soldier to point out where we might sleep. We
were accordingly conducted to a newly-built and as yet unfinished mud hovel,
scarcely approachable for mire, without door, window, or any vestige of
furniture, except a chimney. There was a big puddle outside the door, and the
mud floor was so damp that we could stick our heels into it for some inches.
Naturally imagining there must be some mistake, we returned to the big house,
where I succeeded in speaking to the head-officer, who informed us we must put
up with what was offered, or shift for ourselves. Paul simply expressed it, ❛
Pardon, monsieur, mais il vous dit en Russe, que si vous n'etes pas content,
vous pouvez aller au diable.❜ We began to think this really was Hades, and felt
at a loss with what sop to appease the modern Cerberus.

The Russian ferry-boat being disabled, and the Persian not crossing till
morning, we were compelled to remain where we were, and malarkey the best of a
bad job. We were indebted to the good-nature of some soldiers (the Russian
private is almost invariably a kindly fellow, ready to lend a hand to anyone in
difficulty), for a table, some boards with which we closed the door, firewood,
rough rugs to lie on, and some new milk. The sound of merriment and popping of
corks, which greeted our ears when we walked up to the terrace of the chief’s
house, did not lessen our disgust. He was entertaining a superior member of the
official confraternity, and thus keeping up the character for hospitality,
called for by his possession of a Persian decoration, nominally acquired by the
exercise of that virtue, but really by purchase, if Tabreez talk was true.

*May 26th.* — We did not pass a very comfortable night. I left before breakfast,
to try and get our passports back from the officials who had them to examine.
Returning unsuccessful, I was just detailing my experiences to Tucker, when he
was suddenly seized with a fainting-fit, which lasted for some time. When he
showed signs of recovering, I sent up Paul to the large house to say that my
friend was ill, and to ask for the loan of a saucepan to make some soup in. He
returned shortly, having seen the head-officer, with the message that they did
not keep things to lend. Disgusted at our treatment the previous evening, I had
already written a complaint, which I purposed addressing to one of our friends
at Tiflis. I now added this detail to the catalogue of offences, and, on going
up a second time to receive our passports, handed over a copy of it to the
officer, whose guest I had learnt spoke French, and would therefore be able to
read it for him. He did not then, or on our return, offer any excuse for his
conduct towards us; and we therefore carried out our purpose of presenting the
complaint, which, we were subsequently assured, met with attention at
head-quarters.

When the Persian ferry-boat came over, about 8 o’clock, Tucker was fortunately
well enough to walk down to it. We embarked with a miscellaneous company of six
donkeys, two horses, some ragged peasants, and an Armenian merchant, who rode
with us up to Tabreez. There was no rope to the boat, which was only propelled
by two wretched apologies for oars, and the current was so strong that we seemed
to run a chance of seeing the Caspian shortly. The men in charge knew, however,
how to take advantage of the eddies and backwaters of the stream, and finally
landed us in safety on Persian soil, about three-quarters of a mile below the
custom-house. The banks had been quite lately under water, and were now an
almost impassable swamp; we picked our way along them some little distance to a
sandspit, on which a number of camels were reposing, until the boat should be
ready to return. In the interval we hired some of them to convey us to the
station. to which we rode in an imposing caravan, Francois leading the way with
great solemnity. We found the head of the custom-house was the man to whom
Monsieur Ralli had told us to apply for help. As he spoke a few words of French,
we were able personally to explain our needs to him; and we were at once taken
to his room, where he made a sofa for Tucker with his carpets, and shared with
us his dinner, a most excellent mutton-broth. We found that our Russian
paper-money would be useless beyond the frontier, and consequently had to change
into tomans (a rude silver coin about the size and value of a franc) a sum
sufficient for the next two days’ journey.

From Djulfa toTabreez is distance of about ninety miles, which is divided into
four stages. In Persia, as throughout the East where Russian influence has not
yet introduced that doubtful luxury of civilisation, the ❛telega,❜ wheeled
carriages are the exception, and all the traffic and commerce of the country is
carried on horse and camel back. The post-stations vary from sixteen to
twenty-five miles apart, and the ordinary plan is to ride one stage in the
morning, rest in the heat of the day, and start again with fresh horses towards
evening. In this way from forty to sixty miles a day may be ridden without too
much fatigue. We found no difficulty in obtaining animals to carry us the first
stage, which Tucker now felt himself equal to undertaking. There was not,
however, a spare horse for the postboy, who had in consequence to run along by
our side, until we met some return-horses, one of which he mounted. Our saddles
were in various stages of decay, and of most remarkable construction, with
narrow seats and high peaks in front; the stirrups were ludicrously short, and
incapable of being lengthened, so that our knees suffered no slight torture
after we had been a short time on the road. The horse-track leads up into the
elevated tableland of North-western Persia, by a gentle but continuous ascent of
at least 3,000 feet, Leaving on our left the isolated cone we had remarked from
the Russian bank, we rode along bare slopes in the direction of the only gap in
the chain before us. The backward view was very wonderful; a shelf at the base
of the hills on our left was dotted with the bright-green or chards of several
villages, while below us lay the trough of the Araxes, bare, brown, and hideous,
from which the eye sought relief in the pure snows and noble forms of the
summits of Kanudschuch, which looked from here their full height of 12,854 feet.
The narrow glen through which our road now lay was sufficiently picturesque. The
mountains on either side were covered with grass; a little stream, with a line
of trees along its banks, turned several watermills. Farther on the crags became
bolder, and we noticed an extraordinary distortion of the strata. The narrowest
point of the pass was defended by two old towers, now in ruins. We emerged at
length on an upland plain surrounded by bare hills, a description applicable to
the greater part of Persian scenery. The village of Datarzian soon came into
sight under the hillside on the left, and the first house in it proved to be the
post-station. The three we saw on the way to Tabreez were almost alike, and a
description of one will serve for all. A square building of unbaked mud
surrounds the courtyard, into which you ride; on three sides are the stables, on
the fourth the rooms for the reception of travellers. There are generally two —
one on the groundfloor beside the gateway, and the other (which is ccol and airy
in hot weather) built over it. These rooms we found quite bare of furniture, but
had no difficulty in obtaining mattrasses and pillows to lie on, which both
looked and proved clean and free from insects. Datarzian is a small and poor
village, but we succeeded in getting milk and eggs, and Paul sacrificed a fowl.

*May 27th.* — The morning was lovely, and the snowy chain north of the Lake of
Urmia, towards which we were riding, was a fine object in the distance. Near at
hand there was little to diversify the road, until we came to a large ruined
khan, the doorway of which was handsomely decorated with tessellated tiles.
Having traversed a watershed, we descended slightly, and crossed two streams,
along which a few trees and watermills were scattered. Before us was a broad
cultivated plain, like that of Coele-Syria. A grove of trees on its opposite
side was pointed out to us as Marand, the town at which the road from the
Russian frontier joins the caravan route from Tabreez to Trebizonde.

A Persian town is a very curious sight when seen for the first time. A green
grove appears in the distance; ❛that is Marand,❜ says the postboy. As you
approach the trees become distinct; you pass a few detached orchards surrounded
by high mud walls, but it is not till you have fairly entered the place that any
houses are visible. The main street of Marand is shaded by trees, and watered by
a stream in which the juvenile population, mostly in a state of nature, were
engaged in making mud-pies. The houses stand on either side, all but the poorest
surrounded by gardens, vineyards, and orchards. They are of one story, and
flat-rooted. The walls are built of grey mud, well smoothed and finished off
(reminding Tucker of Devonshire cob), and often slope inwards towards the top.
The windows are filled with very neat wooden lattice-work frames, the small
interstices between which are plastered over with oiled paper, instead of glass.
The women whom we saw struck us as exceptionally hideous; the men are an
active-looking race, more akin to one's idea of Hindoos than to the more
apathetic Turk. The common people and children wear a kind of elongated nightcap
— the upper classes carry the tall Persian hat. We lunched off ❛kabobs❜ (scraps
of meat stuck on a stick and toasted), and ❛kaimak❜ (a kind of Devonshire cream);
our greatest success was the discovery of a bottle of wine, pure juice of the
grape, which owed little to any skill in its manufacture. When we were on the
point of starting an unexpected question arose. At first we were told the next
stage over the hills was dangerous, on account of brigands, and that we must
take an escort; on our refusing to accede to this proposal, it was suggested we
might go by a longer and perfectly safe route, only we should have to pay more
for the horses. This we also declined, and finally, after much talk and waste of
time, were allowed to set out. Our postboy led us, by a track running due south
into the mountains, up a valley terminating in fine rocky cliffs. We now found
out why the brigands had been created; it was for the benefit of two
foot-soldiers on the march to Tabreez, who were naturally anxious to do a job on
the way by protecting us. They were fine raw material — active fellows and
splendid walkers, unencumbered by any uniform, save an old blue coat and a white
belt, to which was hung a flint-and-steel gun. Presently our path turned east,
and crossed a broad watershed, dividing the stream which flows into the Araxes
and the Caspian, from one of the feeders of the Lake of Urmia. A bold summit
rose on our right in rocky slopes intersected by snow-filled gullies; on the
other side a village in a bleak situation, and a serrated ridge of rocks,
attracted our attention. A long ride down a dull winding valley, between barren
and ruddy-coloured hills, brought us to Sofian, a village at the foot of the
mountains, overlooking the salt-plain which extends to the Lake of Urmia. The
people at the posthouse were very civil, and made us fairly comfortable for the
night.

*May 28th.* — We set out early for our twenty-four miles’ ride across the plain
to Tabreez, which was already visible, a dark green spot, in the distance. There
was nothing of interest on the road, except in the parties we either overtook or
met. Now a gentleman on his travels, dressed in a cool dove-colour or grey coat,
bright silk shirt, and tall hat, his horse covered with a gaudy saddle-cloth,
caracoled past us, followed by his servant with the saddlebags; now we met a
train of donkeys gaily decorated with many-coloured tassels, and bustling along
as if they were all hurrying to a féte. To them succeeded a solemn train of
camels, swinging, with every sway of the neck, enormous bells, As we drew closer
to the city, we met more and more people on the roads, and crowds of donkeys
carrying brushwood for the use of the brick-kilns we afterwards passed. A brick
bridge of many arches crosses the considerable stream of the Aji Chai, which,
rising at the foot of Sawalan Dagh, waters the environs of Tabreez, and finally
loses itself in the Lake of Urmia. We now entered the gardens of the suburbs; on
either hand rose grey earth-walls, fifteen feet in height, with fruit-trees
raising their heads over them, and vines pushing green tendrils through their
upper and less solidly-built portions. The doors of the vineyards were of stone,
exactly of the pattern of those in Bashan, and some of them nine feet high. We
were amused to see the primitive mode of knocking for admittance, by picking up
a stone from the ground and hammering it against the door. We rode at once to
the English Consulate, which is the handsomest house in Tabreez, with a pleasant
balcony and garden, and large cool-looking rooms. We found, as we feared would
be the case, that Mr. Abbott had already left for Urmia. The dragoman of the
Consulate (who, however, only spoke Turkish) soon appeared, and requested us to
make ourselves at home until a lodging was found for us. I need hardly say that
there is no hotel at Tabreez, and it is difficult for a European traveller to
acquire sufficient familiarity with the manners and customs of the people to be
able to put up with any comfort at a native khan. Dr. Cormick, the English
physician, who is in charge of the Shah’s son, was unluckily out for the day;
but a German merchant came to our aid, and we consulted with him where we should
lodge. After a good deal of doubt and delay on the subject, it was finally
settled, towards evening, that we should take up our abode with a Nestorian
Christian, who had been employed as dragoman by several embassies going to
Teheran, and was said to speak English. We were greatly amused by our future
host’s manner of introducing himself: ❛You come with me, all right; you know me?
I Lazarus; find me 11th John in middle chapter; all missionary gentleman know
me, all right.❜ ❛Old All Right,❜ as we irreverently renamed this Scriptural
character, led us oft to his house, which was approached by a narrow lane
between two high walls, and a downward flight of steps. The interior, however,
was a pleasant surprise; we found a snug little room, furnished with European
chairs and a table, ready for us. The walls were decorated, in the Persian
style, with paintings of flowers. The windows, filled in with paper — the
universal substitute for glass at Tabreez — opened out into a little garden, on
the other side of which were some more apartments, in which glimpses of our
host’s wife and daughters might occasionally be obtained. At night beds were
made up for us on the floor, and Lazarus turned out to be a good cook, with a
special gift for rice-puddings; so that Paul for a time rested from his
labours, while we ❛fared sumptuously every day.❜ 

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0500]: [Three Russian versts equal two miles.]{.footnote}
