# CHAPTER VI.<br /><small> TABREEZ, ARARAT, AND THE GEORGIAN HILL-COUNTRY. </small>{#six .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The City — Brick Architecture — The Shah’s Birthday — The European Colony — A
Market Committee — Return to Djulfa — A Dust Storm — Ford of the Araxes —
Aralykh — Start for Ararat — Refractory Kurds — A Moonlight Climb — Failure — A
Lonely Perch — Vast Panorama — Tucker’s Story — A Gloomy Descent — Return to
Erivan — Etchmiadzin — The Armenian Patriarch — A Dull Ride — Hammamly — The
Georgian Hills — Djelaloghlu — A Moist Climate — Schulaweri — Tiflis again —
Moore joins us. <br /><br />
::::

TABREEZ, *May 28th to June 2nd.* — We had come thus far to see a Persian city,
which we might hope to find more beyond the reach of European influences than
the towns of the Levant, or even Damascus, the romance of which is fast yielding
to the frequent invasions of Cook’s tourists. Tabreez far exceeded our
expectations. In roaming about its bazaars, we felt the same sensation of
unreality as on our first arrival at Cairo, which, considering what we had seen
in the interval, is saying a great deal. I will begin by describing the view
gained from one of the house-roofs, which form the favourite lounging-places of
the inhabitants. Thus viewed, the city seems to divide itself into three
portions. In the centre are the domed roofs of the bazaars; round these is a
broad zone of dwelling-houses, the grey of their flat roofs and walls enlivened
by the bright-green of the courtyards, and in the nearer ones by the woodwork of
the window-blinds; outside stretches a ring of walled gardens, beyond which is
the bare country, characteristic of this part of Persia. There are no minarets,
and the only conspicuous building, which rises above the level of the low
one-storied houses, is the massive tower of an old castle, in shape not unlike
an Egyptian propylon. The horizon is mountainous on all sides. A range of red
sandstone rises above the town on the north and east; in the south are seen the
snowy summits of the Sultan-Dagh, which reach 13,000 feet; and to the west the
eye sweeps over the plain, often beautified by mirage, extending to the shores
of the Lake of Urmia, the mountains beyond which, fronted by those of the
peninsula of Shahi, close the view in this direction. Owing to the height of
Tabreez (4,000 feet above the sea-level), and the neighbourhood of snowy ranges,
the heat of the sunshine is frequently tempered by cool breezes, and during our
stay the temperature was delicious. 

The bazaars were our favourite haunt, and where we spent the largest portion of
our time. The principal ones, where the most expensive goods are sold — the Bond
Street and Regent Street of Tabreez — are brick arcades, the roof composed of a
series of small domes, through an aperture in the crown of which a column of
sunlight falls on the goods exposed for sale below, In the same stall you see
the fabrics of Lyons and Manchester, lying side by side with those of Shiraz and
Ispahan. Here you may buy a gaudy French silk, or a cotton, in which the Eastern
colours and designs are more or less faithfully reproduced by a Lancashire firm.
We cast but a passing glance on such fabrics, but a gorgeously-embroidered
tablecloth from Rescht, or a beautiful piece of Persian shawl from Shiraz, often
made us linger to chaffer with its owner — generally, happily for our purses,
without result, as the Persians are shrewder men of business, and harder to
drive a bargain with, than even the merchants of Cairo or Damascus. Out of these
arcades open halls or khans, covered by large and very flat brick domes, in the
building of which the Persian architects greatly excel. The patterns introduced
into the brickwork, and the variety and shape of the arches which support these
halls, add much to their effect. They are the principal places where the
wholesale trade of the city goes on; round the sides are the shops; over them
again are offices, or rather dens, where 

:::: { .fs-xs .margin-left-xl }
|        ❛Above their merchandise
| The merchants of the market sit,
| Lying to foolish men and wise.❜
:::

Each of these shops, with the den over it, is encased by a brickwork arch, the
space inside the arch intervening between the lower and upper rooms being filled
in with neat woodwork. The walls are often hung with very effective
black-and-white cotton drapery, on which the favourite device of the Persian
lion, with the sun rising out of his back, is displayed. The centre of the hall
is generally occupied by a pile of carpets, on the top of which their owner is
often to be seen performing his prostrations. There are other halls, entirely
built of wood, and supported by roughly-finished poles; which are as gaily
decorated and as quaint, if not so handsome, as the brick buildings. There are
besides, in the business quarter of the town, numerous open squares, some of
them very large; a row of shops extends all round them, and at the centre of
each of the four sides is usually a brick apse, in the form of a gigantic
alcove. In the middle is a fountain, and the court is planted with flowering
shrubs, such as guelder-roses and lilacs.

The outer circle of bazaars, for rough retail goods, is mostly covered by
picturesque wooden roofs. Here the grocers’ stalls, tastefully decorated with
devices in tinfoil, and the provision-shops, set out with nosegays of
buttercups, poppies, and clover, are a perfect blaze of colour. In one of the
brightest and liveliest alleys in the whole bazaar, you watch the shoemakers,
all stitching as if the pair of shoes in hand must be sent home in five minutes;
close by are the forges, where eight men, standing in a circle, hammer out, with
alternate strokes, a mass of iron, how each hammer keeps clear of the next being
a mystery to the uninitiated. Then there is the carpenters’ row, the
bookbinders’ row, the old clothes row, the knicknack row, where you may buy
anything, from revolvers to Persian ink-trays, and last, but not least worthy of
notice, the saddlers' row. The Persians are decidedly a horsey people, and have
studied all the requisites for a long ride. The roof is bright with
saddle-cloths, some covered with the most beautiful Rescht embroidery; while in
the stores you find gay girths, and tasselled bridles, carpet saddlebags, and
leather salt-pouches, heaped together in picturesque confusion. It was not the
season to see the fruit bazaar in its glory, but the quantity even of nuts and
dried fruits was extraordinary; they were piled up in ten rows of baskets, one
behind another, on an inclined plane. 

The crowd which fills the streets of Tabreez is purely Eastern; you do not meet
two men in European dress during the day, nor do you see the red fez which lends
such life to the cities of the Levant. The ordinary head-dress is the tall
Persian hat; this is now generally made of cloth, and of moderate dimensions, as
the Shah has published an edict against the steeple-like edifices of Bokhara
lambswool which were formerly the fashion. Turbans, dark-blue or white, are
however frequent; they are of tremendous dimensions, and resemble those in the
Museum of the Janissaries at Constantinople, far more than any to be seen in the
streets of the Sultan’s capital. The colour of the dresses is quiet compared to
the bright hues worn by the Turks. The women are clothed in dark-blue sacks, and
have a sort of open crochet-work window in their veils for the eyes to peep
through. There are said to be many Georgian and Circassian beauties in the
harems of the wealthier merchants, but the chance traveller has, of course, no
opportunity of admiring their charms. We were impressed with the busy air of the
street crowds. Everybody walked fast; there were comparatively few fat men;
friends met and told one another a good story, and passed on, and occasionally
some of the younger sort indulged in the innocent amusement known at the
universities as ❛bear-fighting.❜ 

We took several strolls through the outer quarters of the town, where long
winding lanes, with a watercourse running down the middle, and shaded by trees,
lead between high earthen walls; at the crossings is often found a coffee or
rather tea-house, for the Chinese drink supplants the Arabian in Persia. We
noticed many carved blocks of black basalt strewn about, which must formerly
have belonged to handsome buildings. There is only one interesting edifice of
any antiquity now left in Tabreez — the ruin known by the name of the Blue
Mosque; the walls were coated inside and out with encaustic tiles, the
prevailing hues being Oxford and Cambridge blue. The effect is still very
beautiful, and before the destruction of the central dome — caused, as we were
told, by an earthquake — must have been superb. The largest modern building is
the custom-house, which covers a great extent of ground, and consists of large
storehouses supported on columns, and roofed with small domes.

On Sunday we took tea in one of the gardens of the suburbs. They are, in fact,
vineyards with walks round them shaded by trees, and planted with rose-bushes.
The owner charges a small sum for admission, and your own servant brings the
materials for your picnic. Though there is no attempt at the refinements of
European gardening, they are pleasant places enough to while away an afternoon
in, and are much resorted to for this purpose by the townspeople. The Persians
are great lovers of flowers: while we were at Tabreez the single roses, red and
yellow, came into bloom, and were hawked about in large nosegays; the
pipe-stemsat the eating-houses were wreathed with them, and they were made use
of in the most tasteful way by the common people. We met a boy carrying round a
dish of small trout for sale; the fish were laid out in a pattern on green
leaves, with lumps of ice and roses placed between. 

The day after our arrival was the Shah’s birthday, and we were much interested
in witnessing the departure of the high officials from a levée held by the Crown
Prince in honour of the occasion. They were mounted on gorgeously-equipped
steeds, but were themselves dressed in quiet although richly-coloured robes. We
also saw a turnout of troops in the courtyard of the palace — scarecrows of
soldiers, scarcely worthy of a minor theatre. We were told that the men are
personally brave when well led, and are capable of enduring great fatigue on
very little food. They have only a pretence of uniform, are little drilled, and
in consequence do not present a very imposing appearance. There are now, it is
said, 500 percussion muskets in the whole force, and the conversion of flint and
steel pieces is regarded with the same interest as that of muzzleloaders among
ourselves. 

The little European colony at Tabreez soon found us out, and showed us the
greatest hospitality; indeed, we dined out every night but one of our stay. The
mixture of nationalities was most curious. There were only two English subjects
— one, Dr. Cormick, the physician in charge of the Shah’s son, the other a
Maltese. There were, besides, some pleasant Swiss gentlemen, a Frenchman, and a
young Italian, an ex-Garibaldian; the latter two kept up a constant fire of
good-natured chaff on European politics in general, and the relations between
the Pope and the French Emperor in particular. We gathered a great deal of
information, which was new to us, about the internal condition of Persia and its
Government. Crime seems to be repressed with a strong hand, and with the
indifference to human life common in the East: 1,200 executions have taken place
at Tabreez in the last nine years. We were told that death is inflicted in the
quietest way, and that both the headsman and his victim behave like perfect
gentlemen. The one lights his long ❛kalian,❜ smokes a little, and passes it to
the other, who has his whiff; and after hobnobbing thus for a while, the agent
of the law remarks, by some Oriental periphrasis, ❛Time’s up,❜ and chops off his
companion’s head with neatness and despatch. Detected coiners still suffer the
penalty of having their ears mailed to a post, and an instance of this
punishment occurred during our stay, but we missed seeing it. Of public
amusements Tabreez has few; we were just too late to see a kind of Oriental
miracle-play which had been performed in one of the squares, in which Jacob,
Joseph, and Solomon, who are equally revered by Mahommedans and Christians, had
been brought on the stage. One day we stopped to look at a tame lioness in the
street; the poor animal had been partially blinded, and her performance was not
of a very lively character — to us at least, who could not understand the jokes
of her showman. We should like to have visited the Sultan-Dagh Mountains, where
the European residents are in the habit of camping-out during the hot weather;
to have explored the peninsula of Shahi, said to afford the best sport in this
part of Persia; and to have ridden round the southern shores of the lake to
Urmia which was described to us as a very pretty place. A colony of American
missionaries — who make it their special aim to encourage and assist the
Nestorian Christians found in this part of Persia — has settled there, and
established schools and a church. Time, however, was against us, and we made up
our minds to return by the same road to Erivan, and not to risk delay or
stoppage at one of the less-frequented fords of the Araxes.

Before we left, we were anxious to obtain some mementoes of our visit to Persia,
and, afraid of coping unaided with the native merchants, gave a list of things
we had remarked in the bazaars, and wished to purchase, to one of the European
residents, who promised to put us in the way of getting them at fair prices. We
went by appointment to his office, where we met a sort of marketcommittee, each
of whom had brought something to show us. One man dealt in Shiraz shawls,
another in Rescht tablecloths, a third in Bokhara lambskins. There were some
half-dozen in all. They sat in a semicircle before us, and when one brought out
any ❛choice article,❜ all the rest nodded their heads, and uttered a deep
❛wa-ah❜ of admiration. One toothless old fellow, a dealer in swords and
antiques, who might have sat for a picture of Avarice was most demonstrative in
praise of his neighbours’ wares, and altogether upset our gravity by his
pantomimic expressions of delight. Our bargains were at last concluded, and a
box was packed and directed to London not without some fears (unfounded as it
turned out), as to whether we should ever see it again. 

*June 2nd.* — We ordered post-horses to be ready at 7 A.M., and succeeded in
getting off an hour later, amidst a hubbub of claims for ❛backsheesh❜‘ from
various employés, who had, or pretended to have, done something for us. We
lunched and rested at Sofian, and then pushed on for Marand; but having
discovered that there was a second road between the two places, shorter but
steeper than that by which we had come, we insisted on taking it. We soon turned
off, with the telegraph-wires, up a glen to the right of our old track. Near its
head we reached a village, surrounded by verdant pastures, and guarded by huge
and very handsome dogs, which barked furiously at us as we passed. Openings in
the hills on our right were closed by ridges of splintered crags. Our pass was
already in view — a notch in the range before us, to which the road mounted by
short steep zigzags; on our left was a wide pasturage, covered with sheep, and
backed by the snowy peak which we had seen from the other road. The view from
the top burst on us with unexpected beauty. Looking back, the foreground
consisted of fine rocks and ruddy hills; beyond them lay Tabreez, now thirty
miles off, and appearing as a dark-green spot on the plain, from which a long
and uniform slope led up to the base of the mountains of Sultan-Dagh; on the
other side we looked down on Marand, and towards the broken ranges which
separated us from the Araxes valley, the gap through which, leading down to
Djulfa, was plainly visible. At a wayside spring, just below the watershed, we
met a native of artistic tastes, who, with an appreciation of landscape beauty
very rare in the East, asked us which view we preferred, the Tabreez or the
Marand side? The posthouse at Marand was full, but we were taken in by a
hospitable native, whose house stood in a pretty garden, from which he brought
us some red and yellow roses. There were some well-trained standard guelder-rose
trees in front of the house. We had a comfortable room, and plenty of coverlets
for the night. Our host enquired of Paul if we had come to arrange for the
construction of a railroad to Tabreez, and hoped we should make it path through
Marand, and that it would soon be begun. One was scarcely prepared for so keen
an appreciation of the advantages of quick communication in this remote Persian
town.

*June 3rd* — We rode down to Djulfa, and as we passed the defile in the range,
that shuts in on the south the Araxes valley, the rock-tower on the Russian side
looked very imposing. We were already descending towards the Araxes, when we
noticed a black cloud gathering on the mountains behind us, similar to, but more
dense and inky than, that which had pursued us on the Erivan and Nakhitchevan
road ten days previously. Feeling that Djulfa, the scene of our inhospitable
treatment and of Tucker’s illness, was not a place to arrive at drenched to the
skin, we increased our pace, and reached a village about three miles from our
destination, still uncaught. The storm was gaining fast, and looked so bad that
we set off at a gallop. The race that followed could only be described by a
mixture of the styles of Mayne Reid and De Quincey, to which I am wholly
unequal. The ground was tolerably flat, the storm coming up rather on our flank.
On making a sudden dip over the bank that bounds the actual trench of the
Araxes, we saw that we were too late. The dust-cloud, which rides on the front
of these steppe-storms, had crept round and cut us off from Djulfa. In a moment
it was upon us, borne along by a wind which swept twigs and tufts of grass along
the ground, and nearly blew me out of the saddle. The air was so thick that I
could only see the two horses nearest me — one a riderless animal the postboy
was taking back with him. Our beasts seemed to dread the storm as much as we
did, and galloped at the top of their speed. In a minute our eyes were choked,
and every particle of clothing covered with dust. Then came a second blast, and
the darkness grew deeper, so that we could barely see the ground under our
horses’ feet. I remembered that a watercourse cut the plain close to the
station, and managed to hit the plank-bridge over it, passing my companions,
whose voices I could hear, on the right. In another minute the first heavy drops
fell, but at the same moment the Persian custom-house loomed through the
darkness, and we were in shelter. Paul was the only one of the party who got
thrown; he almost rode against the building without seeing it, and, his horse
suddenly swerving, he fell off, but fortunately without hurting himself.
Francois, as usual, turned up among the first, serene and unruffled. At the
posthouse the accommodation was wretched, and the people most inhospitable; but
we had a resource in our former friend, who entertained us with kabobs, and a
bottle of excellent Persian wine.

*June 4th.* — The only acknowledgment of his hospitality our host would accept was a
scrap of paper, on which we wrote our names, aud recommended all English
passers-by to his care. We had to wait some time while the ferryboat was towed
up, by buffaloes, to the proper startingpoint. The river had fallen
considerably, and there was no difficulty in the passage. Our reappearance was
evidently more of a surprise than a pleasure to the Russian officials, who had
probably solaced themselves with the idea that they would never hear or see
anything more of us. Believing that the jolts of the ❛telegas❜ were mainly
responsible for my companion’s previous illness, we made a successful effort to
obtain saddle-horses. We were, however, able to retain them only for the first
stage, and no entreaties or threats would induce the stubborn and dirty
postmaster of the halfway station to furnish us with any other means of
conveyance than the hateful carts. We arrived at Nakhitchevan in the middle of
the day, and I wasted the afternoon in an ineffectual struggle to hire some kind
of spring-carriage. Having called on the governor, who expressed his readiness
to do anything for us, I told him that my friend had been knocked up by
telega-travelling, and that we were most anxious to hire a carriage; but in this
particular he could afford us no aid. There were only two carriages in the town
— one his own, the other an old ❛tarantasse,❜ which we at first thought might
serve our purpose, but which proved to have suffered so much from exposure and
neglect that it was practically useless. Its owner was a curious character. He
had been at one time in business in London, spoke French, and a little English;
but having failed, as he gave us to understand, through his own extravagances,
he had returned to Russia, and was now fixed as a sub-official of the
custom-house in this remote corner of the Empire. The poor man complained
bitterly of the dulness of his situation and the barbarism of his companions,
and sighed after the theatres and diversions to which he had been once
accustomed. There was a heavy thunderstorm in the afternoon, and the continued
uncertainty of the weather made us rather despondent about Ararat. 

*June 5th.* — We started late, in the usual ❛telegas.❜ The big river, which had
been so formidable ten days before, was now much lower; but we were nearly upset
in it, owing to the stupidity of our driver, who let one of his horses flounder
into a hole and break the harness in the middle of the stream. At the next
station there were no post-horses, so we hired some peasants’ animals, and sent
on our men, with instructions to procure and cook some supper for us at the next
station. We followed two hours later, and before we had finished the long stage
of twenty-two versts the moon had risen, and the steppe looked wonderfully weird
in its light, with Ararat and Alagoz looming like ghosts in the background. We
slept at Sadarak, where Paul and Francois had got some supper ready for us.

*June 6th.* — We drove two stations to Kamirlu, where we were to turn off for
Aralykh, the village and Cossack station nearest Ararat, separated from us by
ten versts and the Araxes. I had a note for the postmaster, and he made no
difficulty about giving us carts, although Aralykh is not on a regulur
post-road. We soon saw we were approaching the river, by the swampiness of the
ground, from which the water had but just retreated. The Araxes is here divided
into three branches: the main stream is crossed by a ferry-boat; the two smaller
branches are generally easily fordable, but now offered considerable difficulty.
At the first our baggage was carried on men's heads, who waded across whilst we
plunged in, cart and all. Though our small ark was nearly floated away in the
struggle, we came out in safety on the other side. A hundred yards further we
reached the second branch, the only means of crossing which was a leaky old
boat, and the delay in the traffic caused a most picturesque scene of uproar and
confusion. This ferry, though on no great caravan route, is much frequented by
the nomad Kurds, who are constantly changing their pasture-grounds. These people
are the Arabs of the mountains, and are nearly as striking as their better-known
relations. Hundreds of them now lined the bank, in their bright and picturesque
costumes, with their tents rolled up ready for crossing, their wives and
daughters seated on the heaps of baggage, and their camels and flocks lying down
or straying around. The men, who were fine-looking fellows, wore gay-coloured
dresses, and carried queer old weapons in their broad belts. The girls were
almost all pretty nutbrown maids, with bright eyes and plaits of beautiful brown
hair, which streamed out from under a handkerchief, and reached down to the
waist. They wore brightcoloured jackets and short petticoats. The men are said
to be dangerous customers, but we always found them very civil and friendly,
like most Mahommedan country-people, and they seemed pleased to discover that we
were English. In the present instance they helped our baggage into the boat, and
after some delay we got across. Meantime the passage of the flocks was amusing.
Hundreds of sheep and goats were forced to face the stream by shouts and
pistolshots, while boys and girls dashed into the water to meet and land them
safely. Camels lined the bank, waiting their turn with an air of patient
resignation, and two huge sheep-dogs, off duty for a time, beguiled their
leisure hour with a fight; three hundred yards off the ferry-boat moved
backwards and forwards over the main river. All this made a lively foreground;
and in the distance stood Ararat, as usual wrapped in his afternoon cloud, and
the two peaks of Alagoz relieved against a bright-blue sky. It was a picture one
longed to see transferred to canvas, by some painter equal to the occasion, and
we lamented once more our own incapacity to use brush or pencil to any purpose.
The ferry-boat, which is large enough to take on board a carriage, and works on
a stout rope, floated us easily over the main stream.

The question now arose, how we should get on to Aralykh, still three miles off,
as of course our carts had been left behind. There were some Cossacks in charge
of the ferry, and on showing our letter, addressed to the Colonel at Aralykh,
their chief found us a horse to carry the baggage. As no more animals were to be
had, we were compelled to walk, in the full heat of the afternoon sun, over the
bare sandy waste between us and the village, which is situated at the very foot
of the mountain, at the commencement of the long uniform slope, which serves as
a pedestal to the upper and more precipitous cone. On our arrival, despite our
hot and dusty appearance, we were most cordially received by the officer in
command of this out-of-the-way post, who has a comfortable house and the company
of a wife to console him for his banishment from civilisation. He insisted on
giving up his study to our use, and at once set about making the arrangements
for our intended expedition, which were somewhat complicated, as the natives are
as yet little accustomed to travellers visiting the mountain. The Colonel
entertained us most hospitably, and insisted on our allowing him to procure the
provisions we should require for the ascent. Unfortunately, neither he nor his
wife could speak any language but Russian, which made our communications rather
laborious, especially for Paul, who was in constant request as interpreter.

On the morning of June 7th, we set oft from Aralykh on our expedition against
Ararat. We were accompanied by a Kurd chief, in the Russian service — in whose
charge the Colonel had placed us — and his servant; four Persians, the owners of
the horses, and three Kurds, who were supposed to be mountaineers, and capable
of acting as porters.

Starting on horseback for a ❛grand course❜ is not quite in accordance with
Alpine ideas; but when it is remembered that Aralykh is only 2,600 feet above
the sea, and that the lower slopes of Ararat are perfectly uniform, bare and
stony, we shall be excused for avoiding the dreary grind up them, under an
Araxes-valley sun. At first we kept a course parallel to the river, but soon
turned towards the great mountain, and began to ascend sensibly. We next skirted
the base of a green bastion commanding the lower slopes, in the hollows and
shelves of which several groups of Kurd tents were pitched. A somewhat steep
ascent led up to the green plain which fills the space between the bases of the
two Ararats. The Little Ararat rose immediately before us in an unbroken slope
of about 4,000 feet; it is a typical volcano, uniform on all sides, but least
steep on the Turkish, from which a Russian General is said to have ridden up on
horseback.

On our right the base and upper portion of the cone of the Great Ararat were
visible; the lower part being masked by buttresses, and the whole mass most
deceitfully foreshortened. On a knoll about 300 feet above the plain we found
the group of huts which have been used as a resting-place by most of the
explorers of Ararat. These queer dwellings are underground burrows, constructed
like the villages on the Georgian steppes. A door of twisted twigs, on being
opened, reveals a hole in the hillside, which forms the mouth of a long,
winding, dark passage leading into two or more chambers lighted by holes in the
roof. The floor of these horrid caverns is the natural soil, and their
atmosphere is earthy and tomb-like, while the darkness that pervades them adds
to their depressing effect. The roofs are formed of branches covered with turf,
and as there is nothing outside to distinguish them from the solid ground, it is
easy to walk over them unawares. One of our horses, while grazing, suddenly sank
into one of these dangerous traps, and was left, with only its forequarters
emerging from the ground, in a position from which it was extricated with great
difficulty.

On the way up we halted, and discussed our arrangements with the Kurd chief. We
had been told below that we should find all we wanted at the huts; but they now
proved to be uninhabited, and it was therefore necessary to get a further supply
of bread at one of the encampments lower down. The porters wished also to borrow
a tent. We remonstrated at the delay this would occasion. It was quite early in
the day, for we had reached the huts at 11.15 A.M., and, being anxious to sleep
as high as possible, we proposed to the men that they should go on with us at
once, carrying our rugs, in which we were prepared to pass the night. We had
provisions enough for ourselves, and we pointed out to them, that if they were
afraid of sleeping out at such a height, or had not sufficient food to last till
morning, they would have time before nightfall to return to the huts, where they
might sleep, and remount next day to fetch down our rugs and other baggage. The
men, not unnaturally, were averse to the double toil and trouble involved in
this plan, and utterly declined to carry it out, or to join us in sleeping out
without shelter and a further supply of food. We were therefore obliged to
remain at the huts, and await the arrival of the tent and provisions. Our
position was curiously like and unlike many old Alpine bivouacs. The surrounding
pastures might have been on the Riffelberg, and it was delightful to see again
many well-known Alpine flowers. The rhododendron indeed was sought for in vain,
and we were too low tor gentians^[^0600]^; but their lack was partially compensated by
a new friend, a dwarf wild hyacinth, white delicately streaked with blue, which
grew in great profusion. Little Ararat, however, was sufficiently unlike a Swiss
mountain to dispel any illusion, and if that had not sufficed, one glance down
his side into the brown, bare, burnt-up trough of the Araxes would have been
enough to recall to our minds the fact that we were in Asia, far indeed from the
old haunts. After midday, clouds gathered, and Ararat indulged in his usual
thunderstorm. Some hours passed, but the men did not reappear, and we were
getting more and more impatient, when about 3.30 P.M. they came into sight,
followed by a cow, carrying one of the regular Kurd tents, too large to be
useful for mountaineering, and too heavy to be carried by our men over rough
ground. The three porters now professed themselves ready to go without a tent,
but a second thunderstorm delayed our start till 4.30. With fuel we had load
enough for four men; but as the owners of the horses declined to be of any
service, Francois and Paul had to carry one of the bags between them.

Striking up the spur behind the huts, we made our way as directly as possible
towards the mountain, traversing a good deal of rough ground, and crossing
several hollows, by which we lost time, and partially deceived ourselves as to
the progress made. The porters halted constantly, and our pace was slow; in
about an hour and a half after leaving the huts, we found ourselves in a hollow
between two spurs, and nearly at the snow-level. Here the porters stopped, and
declined venturing upon the snow. It was a good place for a bivouac, and,
although probably 500 feet lower, we thought we were at a height of at least
9,000 feet. We knew that the moon would allow us to start at midnight, and
anxious moreover to save our men the fatigue of acting as porters, we agreed to
halt. The weather looked promising, so we supped on ❛Liebig❜ cheerily over a
bright fire, and then rolled ourselves up in our rugs, with little misgiving for
the morrow, despite the hindrances of the day.

After a sound sleep (at least I speak for myself) we were awake and stirring at
11.30 p.m. We had a glass of hot wine all round, and started at 12.10 A.M. The
first *contretemps* was the discovery that Francois had, despite my warning,
allowed Paul to leave Tiflis without proper boots, and that it was impossible he
could come on with us. He had set his heart upon ascending Ararat, and therefore
very reluctantly turned back. 

After climbing two snow-slopes, we gained a ridge com manding a view of the
ground between us and our mountain. In front lay a deep hollow, such as in the
Alps would be filled by a glacier; the ridge along which we were proceeding
appeared to be connected with, or rather to form a continuation of others, by
which it was possible to make the circuit of the hollow, and reach the foot of
the great rocks, which we had, for convenience and old acquaintance’ sake, named
❛les Grands Mulets.❜ 

In the first hour and a half we had cleared a good deal of ground, and I
remarked to Tucker how well we were getting on, and how ❛fit❜ I felt. Nemesis
was at hand. In another half-hour, though the ground was easy and the
inclination trifling, I began to feel unwell, and experienced all the sensations
of mountain-sickness, generally ascribed to the rarity of the air. In the
present case, too much telega-travelling and want of training supplied a
sufficient cause. Meantime the moon was shining gloriously in a cloudless sky,
lighting up the huge white cone above us, and the distant ranges beyond the
Araxes. Unluckily, I got worse instead of better, and was obliged to delay our
progress by frequent halts. We were now beginning to climb the actual cone, and
the rock-ridge, though still easy, became steeper. When fairly on the face of
the ❛Grands Mulets,❜ after three hours of feeble and intermittent progress, ❛he
force of nature could no further go,❜ and I sadly succumbed, leaving Francois
and Tucker to go on and, as I hoped, to prosper. This was about 6 A.M. The sun
was already high, and the air was pleasantly warm.

I was left on a shelf of the rock with a cup of wine and some food. For the
latter I felt no inclination: as for the wine, it was soon disposed of by my
dozing off and upsetting it with my arm, leaving barely a wineglassful of liquid
as my provision for the morning.

After the first doze I made an attempt to follow my companions, but soon found
it useless; so I resigned myself to fate, and lay down, now in one nook of the
rocks, now in another, sometimes dreaming oddly, as one does in odd places,
sometimes gazing drowsily over the top of Little Ararat (12,800 feet) into
Persia, or over the Kara Dagh ranges to the white line of the Eastern Caucasus.
The sun got very hot, and my head ached horribly; so I scrambled round the rocks
to a shaded shelf, whence I could see far into Kurdistan, a region of snowy
mountains and bare valleys. A streak below me was the infant Euphrates, but I
did not feel much the better for seeing it. Of the Garden of Eden no tradition
seems to linger even in this land of old stories, and if these barren hills were
ever clothed by the groves of the earthly Paradise, the change has been complete
indeed. My state of mind at the time scarcely made me a fair judge of the view,
but I will try to give the impression it produced upon me, as compared with
European mountain panoramas. Most people have seen in a sculptor’s studio a
block of marble hewn down to the rough outline of the group which he has it in
his mind to produce. From a distance the eye catches a certain grandeur of
effect which closer inspection destroys, by revealing that the parts are in
themselves but rough and shapeless masses. So it is with these mountains of
Kurdistan. On them the great sculptor, Nature, seems to have ❛tried her prentice
hand❜ before she had learnt how to chisel out with her gravingtools, frost and
heat, the torrent and the glacier, those exquisite outlines of peak and valley
which are a distinguishing feature of the Alps and the Caucasus. The first
impression I received was, — what a wilderness of mountains — in every direction
nothing met the eye but snowy masses, lying in heaps instead of ranges. The
general effect was exceedingly grand and impressive; but when the details were
examined in search of some beautiful peak, the search was in vain. The slopes
were characterised by dreary monotony, and the summits were without form or
beauty. One distant mass (Bingol Dagh?) alone deserved to escape the general
condemnation.

Time wore on, and at length, about 1.30 p.y., a shout above me announced
Tucker’s return. I augured ill from it, for it was not a cheerful ❛jödel❜ but I
retained a hope that he might, for my sake, be subduing his feelings. To my
surprise, the next shout came from below, and I knew that my companion must have
descended by another route. Through the light cloud that was hanging on the
mountain, I soon saw the two figures, and before long had joined them and heard
their story.

The rocks above my halting-place turned into an aréte, cut into towers,
separated by deep gaps. The climbing here was exceedingly difficult, and the
passage of some of the gaps required both care and steadiness. Fortunately, the
ridge was not very long, and in an hour and a half from the place where I had
stopped, a snowy saddle connecting the rocks with the upper mass of the cone was
gained. Here they rested for half an hour, at a height probably of 13,800 feet.
Above them stretched interminable snow-slopes, seamed here and there by rocks,
but, unluckily, rocks of an utterly useless description to the climber. They
were not ridges, but disconnected crags of lava, suggesting by their fantastic
shapes the idea that half the animals, after leaving the Ark, had been petrified
as they came down the mountain. Here was an elephant, glissading elegantly,
using his trunk for an alpenstock; there a tapir, or some antediluvian-looking
beast, by whose untimely fate, now for the first time discovered, naturalists
have lost a species.

Before long the snow took the form of hard névé, and it was necessary to cut
steps. Francois was by this time so exhausted that he could do no more; Tucker,
however, pushed on alone, and by cutting about 1,000 steps, succeeded in
reaching a point a little under 16,000 feet.^[^0601]^ Such work, at a height equal to
that of Mont Blanc, cannot be continued for ever, without long training; his
breath began to fail, and his head to throb painfully, so that he was obliged to
rest every twenty or thirty steps. The tremendous staircase required to reach
the summit was not to be accomplished single-handed, and at 12.10 P.M. after
nearly four hours’ solitary work, the top looking as far off as ever, and clouds
collecting rapidly round the mountain — Tucker turned to descend. Having
rejoined Francois, they returned quickly together down the tracks made in the
ascent, avoiding the rocky aréte, by slithering down the snowslope on its left,
which had been hard-frozen in the morning.

We plunged gloomily through soft snow, and over the tiresome rough lava-crags,
and, despite the mists, found it easy to follow our old track to the spot where
we had left the Kurds. They now shouldered with ease the burdens under which
they had groaned and staggered the evening before, and led off at a quick pace
for the huts, where we arrived about 6 P.M., having halted often on the way. The
last part of the walk was in rain, Ararat having succeeded in his daily task of
collecting a shower in otherwise fine weather. We regained the huts at 6.30
P.M., having been 18½ hours out.

We slept in the Kurd tent — I badly, but Tucker, as he deserved, soundly enough.
These tents have black roofs, like those of the Arabs, from which they are
otherwise very different. Stakes three feet high are driven into the ground in a
circle, and to the ends of these the top of the tent is loosely fastened. It is
afterwards forced up and made taut by poles inserted underneath. The sides are
then filled in with a roll of matting or reeds, through which the winds
penetrate far too easily. The next morning was fine, and the Kurd porters, to
gain several more days' pay (their object throughout), were willing to carry the
baggage anywhere. Our provisions, however, were exhausted, and we must have
waited a day for a fresh supply. I did not feel able to try the mountain again
with any chance of success, without rest and good food, and Tucker had done
nearly enough. After an hour's debate. we decided that we had no choice but to
descend to Aralykh.

On the way down, we had a good deal of talk (through Paul) with the Kurd chief,
who was a good fellow in his way. Though otherwise an intelligent and
well-informed man, he shared the superstition prevalent among the natives at the
foot of the mountain, that its top never has been, and never can be, trodden by
mortal foot, This belief is maintained, despite the two recorded and undoubted
ascents of Herr Parrot in 1829, and General Chodzko in 1850. Neither of them
are open to the slightest doubt. Parrot positively asserts that, on his third
attempt, he gained the actual summit, of which, moreover, he gives an
intelligible description. General Chodzko led a regular military expedition
against the mountain, advancing slowly, but surely, until he pitched his camp a
few hundred feet below the top. There he remained for a week, engaged in
scientific observation. Both these ascents took place in the early autumn, when,
owing to the diminution of the snow, the summit is most accessible. Our Kurd
also knew Alagoz well, having been in the habit of feeding his flocks on the
great upland pasturage, which lies to the south of the peaks; and he confirmed
General Chodzko's account of the existence of a small glacier near the top, by
telling us that there was a river there which stood still on account of the
cold. General Chodzko ascended the highest peak of Alagoz, when employed on the
military map of the Caucasian provinces, in 1847. He describes the top as
exceedingly small, and the final scramble as more fatiguing than difficult. The
second summit he pronounces altogether inaccessible.

The Colonel welcomed us back most cordially, and invited us to stay and rest;
but we were anxious to get to Erivan, and so, after paying off our Kurds, wished
him good-bye, and rode on to the ferry. The Persian owners of the horses had
demurred to being taken on to Kamarlu as part of the day’s work, and we had
compromised the question, by promising them a ❛backsheesh❜ on our arrival there.
At the ferry they refused to go any further; we surprised them by paying no heed
to their noise, and taking the horses over with us. At the second branch we
found the leaky boat replaced by a rude log-raft, buoyed on inflated skins. on
which we crossed, some Kurds swimming our horses over. The scene was otherwise
unchanged, except that the Kurd girls were even prettier specimens of their race
than those we had seen before. The sun was scorchingly hot as we rode into
Kamarlu, and we were glad to throw ourselves down for half an hour on the wooden
benches, in a cool room, while our ❛telegas❜ were prepared. The Persians having
persisted in their resolve not to cross the river, we left their horses in the
charge of the postmaster, and set out to drive the two terribly rough stages
into Erivan, where we arrived, sore and sorry, about sunset.

*June 10th to 12th, Erivan.* — We sent out Paul to make enquiries, and endeavour
to conclude a bargain for horses, to enable us to ride back to Tiflis, by
country-roads, for we were quite determined to have nothing more to do, for the
present, with the post-carriages of the Caucasus. Our plan was to visit
Etchmiadzin, and take from thence a track leading along the flanks of Alagoz
(which we entertained thoughts of attacking), and then passing through the
hill-country of Georgia, and across three ridges, varying between 6,000 and
8,000 feet in height, before it finally rejoins the post-road, three stations
out of Tiflis. Paul was successful in finding a man in the bazaar, who agreed to
furnish us, at a reasonable price, with horses and men who knew the roads we
wished to follow. In the evening of our first day’s vest, I was attacked with a
violent pain at the back of the head, got no sleep, and sent next morning for
the Russian doctor. He said there was nothing the matter with me, and prescribed
a mild solution of peppermint, which was neither nice nor useful; in the evening
he came again, and ordered leeches and a mustard-plaister. This vigorous
treatment was effectual: I slept fairly, and got better next day, so that by the
morning of the 13th, I was ready to make a short stage of three hours, on
horseback, to Etchmiadzin, Tucker, meantime. had been busy in the bazaar, in
getting a light mattrass stuffed and made up, and in making other small
provisions for our week’s ride across the hills to Tiflis.

*June 13th.* —The ride to Itehmiadzin, despite the distant view of Ararat, is on
the whole a dull one. The road passes under the fortress of Erivan, which might
perhaps be formidable to Asiatic troops, and crosses the stream from the Gotchka
lake, which here flows in a picturesque ravine. There is an untidy botanical
garden on its further bank., For some little distance out of the town the
country is cultivated, but the greater part of the twelve miles is over a bare
and stony plain, broken halfway by a village, and further on by a
Druidic-looking ruin on the left of the road. The village of Etchmiadzin is
conspicuous, from a distance, by the number of its churches; they are of the
usual Armenian style of architecture, lofty for their size, with circular towers
capped by stumpy steeples. The village and bazaar are poor, and the place is in
a very uninteresting situation, on a broad plain, watered by the stream, which
has its sources on the eastern flanks of Alagoz. The convent and cathedral are
within a large fortified enclosure, which has in its time resisted many attacks
from the infidels, We were assigned a room in the convent, and the monks did
what they could to make us comfortable. They all wear the Circassian hood, or
❛baschlik,❜ which is far more graceful than the square cap of the Russian
priest, or the cowls of European Orders. The cathedral is a quaint old building,
covered with elaborate but somewhat barbaric sculpture, and decorated internally
with fine wood-carving and numerous pictures of saints. The greatest sign of
progress about the place is a large reservoir, which has been lately
constructed.

We were invited in the evening to take tea with the Patriarch. He is a fine but
not intellectual-looking man, with a splendid beard; he was dressed in robes of
purple silk, and wore magnificent Orders, some of which had been presented to
him on his recent visit to St. Petersburg. We were introduced by an Armenian
merchant, whose acquaintance we had made on the Black Sea, and whom we now again
most opportunely met. ❛His Holiness,❜ who quite plays the Pope amongst his
countrymen, was very affable, and, could he have spoken any Christian language
except Russian, would doubtless have given us a good deal of interesting
information. As it was, he spent the best part of an hour in proving to his own
satisfaction how much more charitable and tolerant the Armenians were than the
Greeks, and how much they sympathised with the English in ecclesiastical
matters. Toleration is a virtue often found in the weaker party, and the poor
Armenians need at present all the sympathy they can get, as their Church is
divided against itself — one party, headed by the Patriarch, acquiescing in
Russian supremacy and interference; while the other resents it, and urges the
removal of the seat of the patriarchate to some spot outside the Czar’s
dominions. The room in which we were received was hung with a long series of
portraits of (to us) unknown Kings of Armenia, headed by the present Czar of All
the Russias. On our departure the Patriarch presented each of us with his
❛carte-de-visite.❜ After we had returned to our room, a secretary appeared with
an English document, which he wanted me to copy; it was the receipt of a
Calcutta firm for some money paid in to the Patriarch's account by an Armenian
missionary in 1814. The man was very anxious to know if he could get the money
now by sending to London, but we thought it best to decline giving an opinion on
that delicate point.

*June 14th.* — In the morning we were shown the convent library, which is small,
but contains some magnificently-illuminated manuscripts. A Bible, with numerous
and quaint pictures of Old Testament history, was I think the handsomest I ever
saw. Our day’s ride lay up the valley on the eastern side of Alagoz; the country
in general is distressingly bare, and the track led us over stony downs, until
it came suddenly to the brow of a cliff, under which flowed a stream in a
verdant trough, with the village of Oschagan on the opposite side. An old bridge
formed the foreground to a picture which perhaps struck us more than it would
have done in a country less generally monotonous. The long gentle slope from
here up to Aschtarak was a perfect Eden contrasted with the bare wastes beyond.
Careful irrigation had clothed the soil with a rich mantle of vegetation,
vineyards and orchards lined both sides of the path, and even the dividing
hedgerows seemed to share in the general luxuriance. The village stands on a
brow above the sunny slope which supplies it with corn and wine, and its
inhabitants have a more prosperous air than most of the Armenian peasantry. We
made our midday halt here, and I was glad to rest for two hours in a clean room,
for my Erivan attack had left me somewhat weak and lazy.

The only interesting features in the latter part of the day’s ride were the
river-beds — picturesque troughs, almost gorges, sunk from 100 to 200 feet below
the general surface, with rugged volcanic rocks cropping out from their sides.
We ascended all day, and towards evening reached a high plain partially
cultivated, and dotted with dismal villages. The first we halted at offered such
bad accommodation that we rode on three miles further to Alekujak, which stands
on the left bank of the torrent descending from the Alagoz glacier. Our quarters
here were about the nastiest we met with during our whole journey. To avoid the
winter-cold at this height (about 5,000 feet), the houses are all constructed on
the principle of a molehole — one passage leading into the family apartments,
which no stranger can enter on account of the presence of the womankind, another
into the stable. In the latter we had to lodge on a sort of dais, provided with
a fireplace and two sleeping-mats, slightly railed off from the horses and cows
that occupied the rest of the apartment. The only fuel obtainable was cowdung,
so that the fire did not add much to the cheerfulness of the situation. What
with the stiflingly pungent smell of the stalls, the noise of the animals, and
the determined inroads of fleas and other insects, we never passed a more
miserable night.

*June 15th.* —The hills were covered with a wet blanket of mist, and our last
hope of Alagoz — the summit of which (13,436 feet), a rock-peak of the Piz
Languard type, l had shown for a moment the previous evening — was extinguished.
We rode on over intensely green upland pastures, surrounded by, if possible,
greener hills. Mists swept over all their tops, and rain fell pretty steadily.
We forded the stream three times before reaching Kondaksaz, a small village
inhabited by Mahommedan Kurds, where we halted for lunch in a stable, a shade
better than our sleeping-quarters. Alagoz now lay well in the rear, and the
track leading over to Alexandrapol turned off on the left. A plain, on which
large herds of horses were pasturing, was soon crossed, and we entered a long
and narrow glen; the scenery and the weather were both bad Scotch, and we could
not look forward with any pleasure to the passage of the watershed between the
Kur and Araxes, which we were now approaching. After passing two villages, one
on either hand, the glen narrowed, and the track finally made a sudden dash up
the hillside on the right, bringing us very quickly to a grassy ridge 7,828 feet
above the sea. We were surprised to see a rapid and long descent before us on
the northern side.

The valleys of the tributaries of the Kur are everywhere much deeper cut than
those of the Araxes, and the Georgian highlands are consequently more
picturesque than those of Armenia. Snow lay heavily on the pass, and we had some
little trouble with our animals. The wild flowers were lovely, many of them old
English friends — such as cowslips, primroses, and violets. We also found a
gentian, and saw again the dwarf hyacinths of Ararat. Two hours below the pass
we came to Hammamly, situated on the banks of a torrent, at the junction of
three valleys. It is on the road from Delidschan to Alexandrapol, and there is a
post-station in the village, to which we of course went.
It was pleasant to find a clean room and a good fire, over which some mulled
wine was quickly brewed, and proved most acceptable after our wet and cold ride.

*June 16th.* — The mists clinging to the bare hillsides around reminded me
irresistibly of Scotland, and the first part of our ride was through scenery
very like that of the Grampians. We followed the post-road for some distance
down the valley; occasionally, near a village, a clump of trees broke the
hillsides, but the general character of the country was unchanged. Several
versts before reaching Kischlak, the next station, we turned over a brow on the
left, and entered a side-valley, which runs up into the hills in a direction at
right-angles to our previous course. We soon came to a village, tidier and more
habitable-looking than the wretched places we had seen since leaving
Etchmiadzin. Above this the hillsides were thickly wooded, a fact we appreciated
the more from having seen no natural timber either in Armenia or Persia.

A rough cart-road led us over a grassy ridge, the summit of which was covered in
mists, and it was not until we had descended some distance that we gained our
first view of Grergeri, a large village situated in a secluded basin, and
surrounded by finely-timbered hillsides. Our horses waded with difficulty,
through horrible mud, into the military cantonment, which is a short distance
from the village. We found shelter from the incessant rain in a small cottage,
built after the Russian style, and bearing evidence, in its fittings, of
inhabitants more civilised than the Georgian peasantry. Pictures, mostly of a
religious type, were pasted on the walls, and there was an old family Bible on
the table. Having learnt with satisfaction that Djelaloghlu, our sleeping-place,
was only ten versts distant, we, after a short rest, proceeded on our journey.
The road ascended a small valley, with bold hills on the left, for some
distance, and then crossed a low steep ridge, from the top of which we
overlooked a green tableland filling up the space between the Bezobdal and
Lelwar ranges, both of them offshoots of the Anti-Caucasian chain, The rain was
falling in torrents, but, happily, Djelaloghlu was at hand. It is a place of
some size, laid out in the straggling style common in the Caucasian provinces.
Detached cottages are set down in rows on either side of a broad street of mud.
The houses, individually, are quite as good as an ordinary English cottage. Here
there are, besides, large government stores, and officers’ quarters, with some
pretence of a garden in front of them. We were directed to the village shop, and
found shelter in a sort of back-kitchen, opening out of it, which would have
been comfortable enough, but for the chilly look given by a damp earth-floor. We
shared our quarters with some enormous wine-skins, which were stowed in a row
along one side of the room. The presence of the military ensured us fair food,
and we spent the evening in writing letters, and working ourselves up into an
unusual state of patriotism, by drawing comparisons between a Georgian and an
English June — all in favour of the latter. Calculations showed that rain had
fallen on twelve out of the fifteen days since we left Tabreez, and it fell on
each of the three following days up to our arrival at Tiflis.

*June 17th* — We meant to have started early, knowing we had a long day’s
journey before us; but in the morning Paul complained of being ill, and would do
nothing but groan. It turned out that he had neglected our injunction to change
his wet clothes the previous afternoon, and had consequently caught a chill. A
strong ❛pick-me-up❜ cured him for the time, and at 8 o’clock we set out once
more, to face the rain and mists. Djelaloghlu stands on the brink of a curious
cleft, the bottom of which is at least 100 feet below the level of the plain,
and the sides almost perpendicular. The road dips down, by a steep zigzag, to a
bridge over the Debeda. At the top of the ascent on the other side stands a fine
old stone cross, For several miles we rode over a plain covered with the most
luxuriant herbage, and then entered a long valley between bare green hills, one
of them crowned by a tall wooden cross. At a point were two streams meet was a
large village, where our men wanted to halt; but we, wishing to reach Schulaweri
before nightfall, refused to let them. We forded one branch of the stream
without much difficulty, and followed the other up to its sources among the
hills. The height assigned, in Kiepert's Map of the Caucasus, to the pass we now
crossed, is 5,805 feet. It is probably picturesque, but we saw nothing but fog
and mist, till we had descended several hundred feet on the northern side, when
we found ourselves on a wooded slope, high above the recesses of a deep valley.
The neighbouring mountains were clothed in the most beautiful park-like timber.
The glades and grassy knolls were enlivened by Kurd encampments, sheep and
horses were grazing on the fresh herbage, and the bright costumes of their
owners gave colour to the scene. At this height the trees were still in their
spring tints, and the white-thorn was coming into full blossom. We noticed a
great many wild fruit trees, especially pears and apples. After many windings,
the cart-track succeeded in descending to the side of the stream, which we
followed for some distance down an exquisitely wooded valley. It was our first
introduction to Caucasian forest scenery, and we were constantly halting and
calling each other’s attention to some wall of verdure, built up of gigantic
beech-trees, or a glade where gnarled old trunks and luxuriant underwood
afforded a subject for the artist or photographer. The brown torrent, encouraged
by the recent rains, ventured on some remarkable fulls; at one spot a tributary
leapt suddenly out of the foliage, and tumbled in a sheet of foam into the
larger stream, forming one of the most effective ❛water-meets❜ imaginable. At
last the valley opened out a little, and we came upon cornfields, showing that
habitations were not very far off. We halted at the village-store, a roadside
hut soaked with rain, where we had difficulty in finding a dry corner to eat our
lunch in. Here, nevertheless, our horsemen wanted us to stop for the night, and
told the usual lies to induce us to accede to their wishes. It was said that we
had only ridden halfway, and therefore could not arrive at Schulaweri till long
after dark, and that there were wicked people on the road, which was moreover
barred by an impassable torrent. We were by this time pretty well used to these
bogies, and persisted in starting again as soon as possible. The track at once
crossed, by a bridge, the stream we had been following, and then a short but
steep climb led to the summit of a low watershed, the valley on the other side
of which was broader and more open than that we had just left.

An utterly-deserted village contrasted strangely with the smiling landscape and
frequent cornfields, and the hedgerows, gay with flowering shrubs, often
reminded us of England, to the hillier parts of which the features of the
country bear some resemblance. Where the valley bent round to the north, and
contracted into a defile, we encountered the terrible torrent. The old man in
charge of the horses was much alarmed, and declared the water was rolling down
big stones, and that the passage was too perilous to be attempted; but we rode
through with perfect ease, scarcely finding it necessary to lift our feet in the
stirrups. We had to cross the stream three times, but familiarity, as usual,
bred contempt, and even the leading old man did not hesitate twice. The hills
gradually opened as we drew near Schulaweri, the situation of which is very
beautiful; the town stands in the centre of a richlywooded basin, and is
surrounded by walled vineyards and groves of fruit-trees. The ground on the
north falls in a long slope to the Khram, and the eye sweeps over the
plaincountry to the chain of hills that surrounds Tiflis. A curious natural
arch, in some castle-like crags on the top of one of the hills that overlook the
town, is a conspicuous feature of the view. We were first shown into a gloomy
den, but in a short time got possession of a clean though bare room in a
two-storied house, which was but just finished, and still unoccupied. We were
not sorry, after our forty miles’ ride on tired horses, to spread our mattrass
on the floor, and lie down to sleep.

The next morning (June 18th) we rode out through a fairly-furnished bazaar, and
crossing, for the fourth and last time, the stream of the day before, left the
vineyards behind, and found ourselves on cornland, where teams of sixteen oxen
were ploughing furrows, six inches deep, to the monotonous chaunts of their
drivers. Under ordinary circumstances it is an easy day’s ride from Schulaweri
to Tiflis, but a flooded stream now barred the direct road, and we were obliged
to make a long circuit to the west to find a bridge. The way was enlivened by
the frolics of two half-tipsy Georgians, both riding on the same horse — a form
of cruelty to animals to which the people of this country are much addicted.
They narrowly escaped drowning, in an attempt to ford the stream, half a mile
below the bridge. On the bank stood a comfortable farmhouse, surrounded by some
fine trees, which might have been made into a very pretty place. After crossing
a second stream, by a new bridge, we at last passed, some way off on the right,
a large building, apparently an old caravanserai. We halted at a village,
meaning to lunch; but, though there were many vineyards in the neighbourhood, no
wine was to be had. The puzzle was explained when we found that the people here
were Mahommedans, and those of the next hamlet Christians. We rode on, and in
half an hour found ourselves again on our old track, at the third station from
Tiflis on the Erivan post-road. It was ten versts on to Kody, where we were
obliged to sleep, for our horses, 

:::: { .fs-xs .margin-left-xl }
|            ❛Hollow pamper'd jades of Asia,
| Which could not go but thirty miles a day,❜ 
::::

were completely played out by their previous performances, and plodded on at a
pace which was painful to everyone concerned.

There was scarcely anything eatable to be found at the station — indeed, the
postmaster’s only object seemed to be to get rid of us. We consoled ourselves
with the thoughts of Tiflis, and hotel luxuries on the morrow. Our sleep was
soon broken by the howling of some miserable dogs. The concert was so prolonged
that my friend finally lost patience, and broke it up by firing a revolver into
the middle of the performers, unluckily without fatal effect.

*June 19th,* — From this point we intended to strike straight for Tiflis across
the hills — a route which had been described to us as both shorter and more
picturesque than the tedious approach by the valley of the Kur. During the first
part of our ride we were still following the postroad; the mud was something
indescribable, and the ground ordinarily driven over so heavy that the carts had
been taking lines of their own through the fields. The postmaster at Kody told
us, with apparent satisfaction, that if we had wanted ❛telegas❜ he should have
given us five horses to each, as a less number could not pull even that light
weight through the slough of the highroad to Persia and the Caspian. Presently
turning off at right-angles, we struck up the hillside on our left, by a steep
horse-path mounting beside a gully, in which a quaint little village sheltered
itself. On reaching the brow of the hill, the whole of the great city of Tiflis
and the course of the Kur for many miles burst upon us with startling
suddenness, at least 2,000 feet below. The view is very striking, and when the
snowy chain of the Caucasus is clear, it must be still more so. The descent was
long and steep, down a hillside covered with brushwood and broken by crags. We
met strings of donkeys carrying out goods from the city, and passed others,
laden with firewood, going in the opposite direction, as we rode down through a
suburb of gardens into the Persian quarter. After Erivan and Tabreez, the
streets seemed wonderfully European, with their tall houses, shops with
plate-glass windows, and smartly-dressed ladies in Parisian costumes. The
Russians have spent a great deal of money to establish a handsome European city
south of the Caucasus, and they have effected their object. Tiflis is
undoubtedly a success. It is polyglot, but not Asiatic; and the Persians, like
the foreigners in Leicester Square, keep their own quarter, and even there look
shady and dull compared with their countrymen at home.

*Tiflis, June 20th to 26th.* — We were delighted to rejoin all our luggage at
the comfortable Hotel d’Europe, and to find the missing tent and portmanteau
arrived from Kutais. My time during the next few days was spent principally in
visits to the governor and postal officials, which did not produce any very
great results. I took pains to explain our plan, which was in itself
sufficiently simple — namely, to go to the foot of Kazbek by the postroad,
ascend if possible that mountain, and then cross, by two passes laid down in the
Russian maps, into the valley of the Rion. To the official mind, however, the
unknown and the impossible are coextensive terms; and while I was met with the
greatest personal civility and desire to aid us, I could get no definite
information. or promise of assistance, beyond the posthouse of Kazbek, where the
Governor of Tiflis told me he hoped to meet us in a week's time. There seemed
even to be a question whether we should get thus far, for at the post our
❛Crown-podorojno❜ was laughed at, and we were told no carriage could be promised
us for an indefinite period.

The Grand Duke Alex's (the son of the Emperor) was expected from St. Petersburg
on a visit to the Caucasus. and consequently all the official world were in
motion to meet him, and no one without epaulettes and a band round his cap had a
chance of meeting with the slightest attention. After several efforts I gave up
the post in despair, and sought out a German carriage-master, who agreed to let
us a ❛tarantasse❜ with four horses, to travel voiturier-fashion. We had also to
make several visits to the police to enquire about Francois’ passport, which the
officials at Poti had promised to forward. The authorities would hold out no
certain prospect of its restoration, and seemed to wish him to buy of them a
Russian document, costing two roubles, in its place; so we commissioned the
master of the hotel, who was going back to Europe, to stir up the Poti police,
and he succeeded in recovering the missing passport. Travellers anxious to avoid
that fever-stricken swamp, Poti, often go straight through, trusting to the
promise of the police to send their passports after them — a promise which, in
the cases which came under our personal knowledge, was invariably broken.

On the 20th, the day fixed on for a rendezvous with my friend Moore, who was to
come out straight from England by the Danube and Constantinople, a telegram from
Kutais announced to us the welcome news of his arrival in the country, and on
the 21st he appeared in person, having been most fortunate in getting brought on
from Poti by a Russian lady, who was coming to live with her daughter at Tiflis.
He described the state of the road as something awful: for half the distance
they had found no post-horses, and Tad been obliged to pay high prices for
peasants’ animals, brought in from the fields to meet the demand. The mud was
very bad, but not so deep as it had been a few days before, when a Russian
family, whom he met at the third station from Kutais, had been obliged to have
their carriage dragged for one stage by bullocks, and had taken twelve hours to
accomplish sixteen versts. These unlucky people, who did not care to pay for
extra horses, had taken five days to get over the hundred miles between Tiflis
and the station where Moore found them. With our previous experience, we were
rather dismayed to hear that our friend had left one of his portmanteaus at
Kutais in charge of an official, to be forwarded, and our fears were justified
by its non-arrival for three days after it was due. On its appearance our
preparations were quickly made, and our ❛tarantasse❜ was ordered to come to the
hotel at 1 o’clock on the afternoon of the 26th June.

Two days after we reached Tiflis Paul had declared himself ill, and, to our
great embarrassment, had taken to his bed; he had never entirely recovered his
wetting at Djelaloghlu, and was now suffering from a kind of intermittent fever.
We felt sure that if we could get him well enough to go up with us to the Kazbek
posthouse, a week’s rest in mountain air would restore his strength; but his
illness was a great discouragement, just at the moment when we were starting for
the portion of the journey in which his services were most indispensable. The
doctor, whom we sent for, had recourse to the Russian panacea, leeches, which in
this case did not do much good, and it was by frequent doses of our own quinine
that the patient was finally brought into a condition to travel.

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0600]: [We afterwards found a solitary plant higher on the mountain.]{.footnote}

[^0601]: [We estimated it afterwards, carefully, as between 1,000 and 800 feet below the top.]{.footnote}
