# CHAPTER VII.<br /><small> THE KRESTOWAJA GORA AND ASCENT OF KAZBEK. </small>{#seven .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Start for the Mountains — The Pass of the Caucasus — Kazbek Poststation — The
Governors — A Reconnaissance inforce — Legends — Avalanches — The Old Men's
Chorus — Men in Armour — Our Bivouac — A Critical Moment — Sealing an Icewall
—The Summit — The Descent — A Savage Glen — A Night with the Shepherds — Return
to the Village —Caucasian Congratulations.<br /><br />
::::

WHEN our vehicle drove into the courtyard, we, ignorant still of the utter
uncouthness of all Russian conveyances, were surprised to find a mere shell of a
carriage without any fitments inside. However, by making use of our own luggage
and rugs, we soon succeeded in heaping together seats, which, if they had a
tendency to collapse, were luxurious in comparison to those of our late
❛telegas.❜ Amidst the good wishes of the hangers-on of the hotel, we started on
the journey which was to carry out the object long and anxiously planned, and
throughout all our wanderings steadily kept in view, as the centre and chief aim
of our travels — the exploration of the terra incognita of the Caucasian range.

We slowly jolted over the badly-paved streets of Tiflis, now about to be strewn
with earth to spare the bones of the expected Archduke — a proceeding which, if
the weather held fine for a few days, would be certain to throw dust even in
imperial eyes. Our coachman, a regular Russian peasant, stupid, obstinate, and
good-humoured. crossed the Woronzoff Bridge and took a road along the left bank
of the Kur, which passed through several villages, and, though hilly, was wore
direct than the line taken by the post-road. Before reaching Mscheti we had to
cross the Aragui, a large tributary of the Kur one of the branches of which the
Kreuzberg road follows almost to its source. On our return, two months later,
the long wooden bridge had met with the usual fate of bridges in this country,
and was so much damaged by floods as to be rendered impassable.

Mscheti, if we may believe Georgian chronicles, is one of the oldest towns in
the world. It is asserted to have been founded by Mtskethos, son of Karthlos,
who lived in the fifth generation after Noah, and who chose this site on account
of its beauty and natural strength. A little below it, on the top of a green
hill, are the remains of an extensive church and convent, from which it is said
that a mystic chain used once to extend in mid-air to the cathedral tower of
Mscheti, and serve as a means of mutual communication for the saints of either
church. We drove close under the walls of the old fortified cathedral, where we
joined the post-road which crosses the Kur a mile higher up, and has to return
some distance to the town. The Aragui here flows at the base of high bluffs,
along the sides of which the road is carried. For this stage and half the next
workmen were employed on the construction of the new and still-unfinished
macadamised roadway, which, as soon as the river allows it, descends to the
level ground. Sukan, the second station, is situated in the centre of a fertile
basin, encircled by well-wooded hills, purple as we saw them in the fading
sunset. Although not travelling with post-horses, our ❛podorojno❜ gave us the
right to lodge in the stations. Our reception, however, was at first anything
but hospitable; we were even told to turn out, until the master found we were
willing to pay for rooms and to order supper, when he became less bearish in his
manners.

The stations on the Dariel road are very different to the ordinary type of
Caucasian posthouses. They are substantial stone buildings, with verandahs,
bow-windows, and sometimes a billiard-room. Their internal fittings by no means
correspond with their pretensions. Downstairs the rooms are furnished only with
square stools, and the usual wooden bedstead. The *salle-a-manger* is usually
large, with, in one corner, a cupboard containing a motley collection of
delicacies, mostly liquid — a sort of museum of various shaped bottles labelled
with the names of the choicest brands. I have seen in a row ❛Veuve Clicquot,❜
❛Chateau Lafitte,❜ ❛Allsopp’s Pale Ale,❜ ❛Guinness’ Stout,❜ and ❛Old Madere❜
(sic); there is very seldom more than one bottle of each. The champagne is
generally five roubles, and the English beer one rouble fifteen copecks, a
bottle. A few boxes of sardines and a plate of stale cakes form a set-off to
this tempting array. The samovar and tea are always forthcoming; ❛borsch,❜ or
cabbage-soup, national dish in Russia, is usually to be had very quickly, and
sometimes a beefsteak will be cooked if ordered: but, as often as not, there is
nothing more solid than eggs in the house. Upstairs are a set of rooms provided
with mattrasses, which are charged for extra, such arrangements being considered
quite unnecessary luxuries, It was our readiness to pay for these reserved
apartments which smoothed away the difficulties at first made to ow reception.

*June 27th.* — We got oft at 5 A.M., and enjoyed the beauty of a fresh clear
morning. After a straight stretch of several versts, the road left the valley of
the Aragui, and turned up a narrow glen; a long and gradual ascent brought us to
a green tableland, where a little tarn appeared amongst the meadows. The
posthouse of Duschet stands by the side of a hollow, but the town lies on a
sloping hillside, at some distance to the right; a good many Russians live here,
and we had a letter for the mandant of the district, who, we were informed,
would probably be able to aid us in our preparations for attacking Kazbek. We
found, on enquiry at the station, that he, like everyone else, had gone off to
meet the Grand Duke, so we pursued our journey without delay.

The next stage was across a ridge, wooded to the summit with fine park-like
timber, and down a long and narrow glen on the other side to Ananour. On the
tongue of rock projecting at the mouth of the glen stands a most picturesque
group of buildings, consisting of two old churches and a belfry, enclosed by
battlemented walls and towers. The larger and more modern church is decorated
externally with large and elaborately-carved crosses, and sculptures of trees
with animals feeding on their branches. The village clusters round the foot of
the fortified mound, in a very pretty position at the junction of two torrents,
The road now led up a narrow valley, the wooded slopes were frequently dotted
with castles and towers, and the vegetation was richer than that of a Swiss, but
the rocks not so bold as those of an Italian, Alpine valley. At Pasanaur,
remarkable only for a church in the most gingerbread style of Russian
architecture, the river forks, and the road, following the western branch,
enters a defile, above which the upper valley, lying at the foot of, and running
for some way parallel to, the main chain, opened before us. Scattered hamlets
and noble trees studded the slopes; the lower wooded buttresses of the mountains
were beautifully shaped; the higher ridges (9,000 to 10,000 feet), ❛up to their
summits clothed in green,❜ often ended in peaks of bold outline, and picturesque
glimpses of the snowy chain opened from time to time up side-glens. The horses,
which had done seventy-five uphill versts in the day, required a great deal of
persuasion to trot the last half-hour into Mleti, and we were amused at the
difference between the long guttural grunts of the Russian driver, and the sharp
tones used by an Italian voiturier in like circumstances. The station at Mleti
is one of the most frequented and best provided on the road.

*June 28th.* — The ascent from Mleti, up a slope broken by cliffs, is steeper
than any Alpine carriage-pass I remember, except the wonderful zigzags beside
the Madesino Fall, on the south of the Splugen. At one picturesque corner the
road is seen on the top of a cliff overhead, and anyone unused to mountain
engineering might well wonder how it got there. A little fountain, spurting up a
jet by the wayside, is an incongruous bit of civilisation in the wilderness. In
mercy to the horses we walked, and having sealed the rocky mass, which, during
the latter part of our drive the evening before, had seemed to block the valley,
we found ourselves on grass slopes covered with azalea-bushes and smaller
flowering plants. From this part of the road the view of the head of the valley
beneath is very striking. A thin waterfall leaps down the opposite cliffs; a
village, close beside a curious isolated rock, occupies the last habitable spot
in the valley, and higher up a mere ravine runs under the base of a pointed
peak, which rises above it in grand precipices. A group of houses — consisting
of barracks, a station, and a wayside inn — stands on the mountain-side about
1,000 feet below the pass, filling the place of the ❛hospice❜ on an Alpine road.
I had slightly rubbed my foot during the ascent, and therefore waited for the
carriage, but the rest of the party walked on as far as Kobi. We now traversed,
at a level, a steep hillside cut into terraces, and staked up to prevent
avalanches from gathering impetus enough to sweep over and carry away the road.
The old horse-path crossed the ridge at a point slightly to the east of the
course now followed. The grass and flowers were most luxuriant, owing to
quantity of springs which burst out of the ground on all sides. There is little
distant view from the summit, on which is a stone refuge. The Krestowaja Gora
(or Kreuzberg, as translated on German maps) is the real name of the pass over
the chain of the Caucasus leading from Asia into Europe:^[^0700]^ the ordinary name of
❛Dariel❜ road is only so far appropriate that the defile of Dariel is the most
striking natural feature between Vladikafkaz and Tiflis. If the pass of the
Splugen from Chur to Chiavenna was ordinarily termed the ❛Via Mala road,❜ it
would be an exactly parallel case. The descent on the north side into the valley
of the Terek is one of only 1,500 feet, but it must be very dangerous in spring,
as the way lies down a deep glen choked at the bottom with the remains of
enormous avalanches, which in more than one place still buried the track,
obliging a passage to be cut through them. The slopes are terraced, to protect
the road; the idea of building covered galleries has either not occurred to the
Russian engineers, or was considered too expensive by the Government. It must be
adopted if the pass is ever to be kept open at all seasons. Kobi, the first
village on the northern side, is strikingly situated, at the point where the
glen joins the valley of the Terek. A high cliff shelters the posthouse, from
whence the summit of Kazbek is not in view, being hidden by massive buttresses.
The postmaster here was tipsy. As an English traveller mentions the same fact in
1837, and as he was in a similar happy condition upon our two subsequent visits,
a week and two months later, it is fair to suppose that the complaint is
chronic. The scenery of the valley of the Terek is entirely different from that
on the south side of the pass: treeless valleys, hold rocks, slopes of
forbidding steepness (even to eyes accustomed to those of the Alps), and
stone-built villages scarcely distinguishable from the neighbouring crags, but
for the one or two towers of defence which rise above the clustering hovels, are
the main features of the sixteen versts’ drive from Kobi to Kazbek. A bold
pinnacle of rock on our right reminded me of a Tyrolese dolomite, while the
trough-like character of the valley, and the stern barrenness of the scenery,
carried Moore’s thoughts back to Dauphiné.

:::: { .wrap-100 .caption }
![KAZBEK FROM POST STATION.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0184.jpg "KAZBEK FROM POST STATION."){#b184}
::::

We passed, halfway, a hamlet bearing the familiar name of Sion, behind which a
few trees had been planted, the only ones in the vicinity. Clouds as yet
prevented our catching any glimpse of the snows of Kazbek, but did not hide the
lower mountains. The village is in a fine position, backed on the east by very
steep grass and rockslopes, the supports of a massive rock-peak of at least
12,000 feet in height. Soon after our arrival, the clouds, which up to this time
had filled the glen opening opposite the posthouse, rolled away, and revealed at
its head Mount Kazbek, a magnificent mass of rock and snow, towering thousands
of feet above all the neighbouring summits. The form of the mountain-top is that
of a steep-sided dome; the uppermost crags, which break through the ice, are of
a horseshoe form, and are curiously prominent in all views of the mountain from
the east, and even from Vladikafkaz. We were glad to find the posthouse in the
charge of a civil couple, a man and his wife, the latter of whom spoke a little
German. The charges were high, but we had no other ground of complaint, and
enjoyed during our stay plentiful food, fair wine (selected from the the usual
medley in the cupboard) and much civility. Although a very cursory inspection of
the mountain suggested several routes, offering a fair chance of reaching the
summit, yet it was felt that a make the assault without a previous
reconnaissance would be unadvisable, bearing in mind especially our utter want
of training. Paul was therefore told to find a native who would accompany us, in
the morning, to some point of sufficient elevation to command an uninterrupted
view of the mountain, and at the same time to accustom our muscles to the work
before them. In due course he reappeared, with a good-looking man known as
Alexis, who, he said, was a mighty hunter, and knew more about the mountains
than anyone else. This worthy seemed to our eyes a feeble creature, but as no
one else was forthcoming, and it was not probable that we should put his ability
to a very severe trial, he was engaged to be our pioneer on the morrow.

*June 29th.* —We were up betimes, and starting before 5 A.M., on as fine a
morning as ever rejoiced the heart of a mountaineer, climbed to an old church
perched on a lofty brow 1,500 feet above the village. This building is regarded
with great reverence by the inhabitants, and is made an object of pilgrimage;
but their religious feelings do not prompt them to keep it in repair, and the
interior is in a very desolate and ruinous state. In Klaproth’s time it was the
practice to open it only once a year, but the attendant, who had joined us on
our way up, made no difficulty about admitting us, although to open the door he
had first to gain admission by getting in himself through one of the windows —
no easy task. From the enclosure round the church we could see the ground
between us and the base of the great mountain. Just opposite, and easily
accessible from where we stood, a snow-clad peak, evidently commanding a view of
Kazbek, offered itself as a suitable goal for our morning walk. The way to it
lay up a broad grassy ridge adorned by rhododendrons with large white flowers,
several kinds of gentians, and many other plants which lack of botanical
knowledge prevents my naming. We had not underrated Alexis’ capacity: so long as
the way lay over grass he went well enough, but on reaching the snow he stopped
abruptly, and declined to go any further, so we left him with Paul at the foot
of the final ascent. A climb up steep snow-slopes succeeded by easy rocks led to
the summit, which was more of a ridge than a peak, and over 10,000 feet in
height, Kazbek was now directly opposite us, a long glacier streaming round its
south flank, and ending at our feet. From this point of view we saw the second
or western summit, which (totally invisible from the station) here appears equal
in height to the eastern. This was a source of perplexity. Opinions were divided
as to the relative claims to superiority of the two peaks; and although the
majority were inclined to award the palm to the eastern summit, there was
sufficient doubt about the matter to leave us all well pleased at the discovery,
that from the glacier on the southern flank of the mountain, the gap between the
two peaks appeared to be accessible by a series of crevasse-broken but easily
surmountable slopes, merging in a steep wall of snow or ice, only partially
visible, and as to the exact character of which it was difficult to judge
accurately. As any mistake with regard to the real culminating-point would be
very annoying, and it was clear that, once on the ridge, we should have only to
turn right or left, as might seem advisable, it was unanimously agreed that this
route should be tried — an additional argument in its favour being supplied by
the evident existence, high up on the left bank of the glacier, of several
excellent sites for a bivouac.

With the great mountain full in view, I may now briefly advert to the position
it holds amongst Caucasian summits, and to the legends with which it has been
connected. From the earliest times Kazbek has taken a place in history, and has
somewhat unfairly robbed its true sovereign, Elbruz, of public attention.
Situated beside, and almost overhanging, the glen through which for centuries
the great highroad from Europe into Asia has passed, it forces itself on the
notice of every passer-by. The traveller — who, even if blessed with a clear
day, sees Elbruz only as a huge white cloud on the southern horizon, as he jolts
over the weary steppe — is forced to pass almost within reach of the avalanches
that fall from his more obtrusive rival. It is not difficult, therefore, to see
why Kazbek has become thus famous, why the mass of crag on the face of the
mountain, so conspicuous from the post-station, is made the scene of Prometheus’
torment, or why a later superstition declares that amongst these rocks, a rope,
visible only to the Elect, gives access to a holy grot, in which are preserved
the Tent of Abraham, the Cradle of Christ, and other sacred relics.

We were told by Mons. Khatissian, an Armenian gentleman, who has spent many
months in examining the vicinity of the mountain, and in making scientific
observa-tions on its glaciers, that the Ossetes occasionally call Kazbek,
Beitlam and Tseristi Tsoub (❛Christ’s Mountain❜) — names which seem connected
with these traditions. On the top of Kazbek is said to stand a splendid crystal
castle, and near it a temple, in the middle of which hovers a golden dove. The
mountain has undoubtedly been held in reverence for many centuries by the
neighbouring population, and it is not only the native inhabitants who have
associated it with superstitions legends. A traveller in 1811 breaks forth, on
reaching the station of Kazbek, into the following rhapsody: ❛Alternate
sensations of awe and rapture quickly succeed each other in this ancient land of
enchantment: it was assuredly in these abodes that Medea compounded her
love-potions and her poisons; here it was that Prometheus received the reward of
his bold impiety; this is the very birthplace of magic; and it is from these
lofty peaks that the immense *roc* used to take its flight, intercepting the
rays of the sun.❜ 

Mons. Khatissian also informed us of the existence of human habitations, now
deserted, at a height of 11,600 feet, on the eastern flanks of the mountain,
These consist of cells, half hewn from the solid rock, half built up of the
rough boulders which abound in the neighbourhood, amongst which a cross of white
porphyry still remains. Here, according to tradition, once lived a band of
monks. The superior was renowned for his austere life and stern piety, and a
daily miracle proved his claim to the title of saint. At daybreak a ray of light
penetrated through an aperture in the wall, and illumined the darkness of his
cell. In the centre of this ray the holy man was accustomed to lay the volume he
was studying, which remained suspended in the air without any apparent support.
The high claims of their superior to their reverence could not, however,
reconcile some of the younger monks to the severe discipline he imposed upon
them. By the machinations of these wicked men, the saint was exposed to a
temptation similar to that of St. Anthony, but unhappily with a different
result. The suspension of the miracle followed; the heavy volume, when laid in
its accustomed place on the sunbeam, fell with a crash to the ground. The Abbot,
overcome by the malice of his enemies, retired to a cave still higher on the
mountain, to pass the remainder of his life amidst perpetual snows. The monks,
freed from all restraint, gave themselves up to the license for which they had
schemed, until at last the anger of Heaven was aroused by their misdeeds. A
fearful storm fell on the mountain, the cells were destroyed, and nothing more
was ever seen or heard of their inmates. So firmly is this story still believed,
and so great is the reverence felt by the peasants for the once holy place, that
Mons. Khatissian had the greatest difficulty in persuading anyone to conduct him
to the ruined cells; and his guide, when induced to venture, fell on his knees
at every other step, imploring Heaven to overlook their presumption. A heavy
rain-storm the following evening, which threatened destruction to the
hay-harvest, was attributed by the villagers to the Divine wrath at Mons.
Khatissian’s explorations, and he was recommended by the late Prince Kazbek to
leave at night, if he wished to escape personal violence.

The accuracy of the above legend is, I fear, rather impugned by the fact that a
lady, who published her ❛Letters from the Caucasus❜ in 1811, actually saw one of
the last of these recluses, of whom she does not seem to have formed a very
favourable opinion. I quote her own words: ❛I had often heard of hermits, but
had never seen one. Learning, while at Kazbek, that I could satisfy my
curiosity, I went to visit, in a cell not far from that place, one of these
sloths, who are such vast pretenders to piety. I was surprised to find a healthy
young man: his hermitage is hollowed out of the rock, where, thanks to the
superstition of the people, who look upon him as a saint, he lives in abundance.
Should he ever be canonised, I shall not indulge much hope from his mediatio;
for I saw nothing in this recluse but a cunning rogue, and that sort of address
by which the lazy feed on the simplicity of others.❜ 

The name by which the mountain is now known, and which has been apparently
accepted by geographers, to the exclusion of several more or less
unpronounceable native titles,^[^0701]^ is, like Elbruz, of Russian origin. A certain
Prince Kazbek, or Kasibeg, who lived in the village of St. Stephen (the present
Kazbek), was one of the first of the mountaineers to perceive that his best
policy was to recognise a *fait accompli,* to embrace Christianity, and to
acquiesce in Russian supremacy. He received his reward; the conquerors have
given him immortality, by conferring his name upon the village in which he
lived, and upon the great mountain by which it is overhung.

Even with the Russians — who, as a race, have no feeling for mountains, and
regard them more as barely tolerable eccentricities than as admirable beauties
of nature — Kazbek has, during the last twenty years, excited a good deal of
attention. The creation of an ice-barrier across the torrent issuing from the
great glacier of Devdorak, on the north-eastern flank of the mountain, has from
time to time caused calamities wrongly attributed by the Russians to avalanches,
On our arrival in the Caucasian provinces, the first thing we were told was,
❛Oh, you are just in time to see the great avalanche from Kazbek.❜ Some years
ago the Dariel road was swept away, and a similar catastrophe was considered
probable during the coming summer. Everyone in Tiflis was talking of it, but
happily it never came off, and we learnt from Mons. Khatissian that some, at
least, of the historical avalanches are apocryphal. The record of one (in 1842)
is preserved in the official archives at Tiflis, where the reports of the
officers stationed at the Dariel fortress, and commissioned by the then Viceroy
to ascertain the imminence of the impending danger, still exist. Mons,
Khatissian, with some trouble, discovered the officer whose reports were fullest
and most intelligible. He asked for further details as to the nature of the
catastrophe. The Colonel was at first confused and ambiguous, but soon, with an
air of frankness, exclaimed, ❛I will tell you the real state of the case — I was
never near the mountain at all.❜ ❛But here I have an elaborate description of
the state of the glaciers, with your signature?❜ ❛That is very possible. You
see, I received orders from Tiflis to go and report on the state of the
mountain. Why should I peril my life to no purpose? I could not avert the
danger, so I wrote, and said the mountain was much as usual. Then I got second
instructions; I was to go in person and send a full detailed report of the exact
nature of the danger to be apprehended. I started; I climbed into that horrible
glen; I saw precipices overhanging my head — torrents roaring at my feet.
Suddenly I came in view of a whole mountain of ice, already torn into fragments
by the steepness of the slope to which it clung. To advance was certain death,
I reflected on my wife and children, fled back to the road as quickly as
possible, and reported that the expected avalanche had fallen, and that,
happily, no one was the worse for it.❜ ❛Then,❜ asked Mons. K., ❛the celebrated
avalanche of 1842 never existed but on paper — in fact, is your creation?❜
❛Exactly, Monsieur,❜ was the reply.

Preserved in the same office is a scheme for preventing the recurrence of the
danger, which, for its happy audacity, deserves mention. An engineer proposed to
build a wall in front of the glacier, to prevent its further advance. That
inundations issuing from the glen of Devdorak have from time to time seriously
injured the Dariel road, is undoubted; but the notion of their recurrence at
fixed intervals, and the supposition that the injury was caused by avalanches,
are equally ridiculous.^[^0702]^

Attempts to ascend Kazbek have not been numerous. Klaproth claims to have got
halfway up, but, as he admits that he did not reach the snow-level, the halfway
did not amount to much. In 1811, the well-known German traveller Parrot made a
series of most determined attempts to reach the summit, by the same route we
adopted; but he was compelled to retreat from the foot of the icewall by bad
weather, and the fears of his companions. About 1844, Herr Moritz Wagner
ascended ❛to the lower limits of eternal snow,❜ to use his own words — a very
moderate measure of success, upon which some German and English newspapers
lately claimed for him the honours, such as they are, of the first ascent.
Several half-hearted attempts to climb the mountain have been made of late years
by Russian officers, but with very little success, owing to the exaggerated
fears of their native guides, and their own lack of proper mountaineering gear —
such as rope, ice-axes, and spectacles. Hence we found in the Caucasus a
widespread belief in the inaccessibility of the peak, and we were regarded at
Tiflis with a mixture of amusement and pity, as ❛the Englishmen who were going
to try and get up Kazbek,❜ and had the audacity to expect to succeed, where
Captains, Colonels, and even Generals of the Imperial Russian Service had
failed.

We spent a pleasant hour on our lofty perch, and then, by a ❛rapid act❜ of what
may be called ❛snowmanship❜ rejoined Paul and Alexis, The snow being in
excellent order, we sat down, one behind the other, at the foot of the rocks,
and letting go, slid with great velocity to the base of the peak, where our
companions were waiting for us. They, never having seen such a performance
before, were horror-struck at our apparently headlong descent, and could
scarcely believe their eyes, when the confused heap, in which we landed,
resolved itself into its component parts, apparently none the worse. By 2 P.M.
we were back at the posthouse, and were delighted to find that the Governor of
Tiflis had arrived, accompanied by Colonel Soubaloff, the Commandant of Duschet.
They had come thus far to welcome the two Grand Dukes, who were about to pass on
their way to Tiflis. The acquaintance of the Governor of Tiflis we had already
had the pleasure of making, and both he and the Commandant entered heartily into
our plans, and rendered us all the aid in their power in making our
arrangements.

The most experienced mountaineers of the village were at once summoned — to wit,
three aged men, all more or less lame or blind, who in the way they nodded their
heads together, and by their occasional outbursts of eloquence, reminded us
forcibly of the old men’s chorus in ❛Faust.❜ We at last settled with them to
take four men as porters, at two-and-a-half roubles (seven shillings each) a
day. They were to follow where we led, and to pitch our little tent where we
directed. I must do them the justice to say that they carried out their part of
the bargain with an honesty and good-humour which led us to form an unluckily
premature estimate of the general character of the people with whom we should
afterwards have to deal.

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption }
![Mountaineers in Armour.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0195.jpg "Mountaineers in Armour."){#b195}
::::

In the evening, through the kindness of the Commandant of Duschet, we had an
opportunity of witnessing a sword-dance, performed by some mountaineers, habited
in complete suits of chain-armour, who had come down from a neighbouring village
to greet the Grand Dukes. They carried small round shields, like those of the
Kurds, which they used very cleverly to parry the blows of their assailants; the
principal feat seemed to be for one man to defend himself against the assault of
two enemies.

*June 30th.* — Having marshalled our porters, who had a horse to help in
carrying the luggage as far as possible, we started on our ascent of Kazbek,
receiving a parting benediction from the two officials, who came out into the
balcony to see us off. Instead of climbing to the old church, we took a path to
the right, which led us into the glen opposite the station, and we then passed,
over rough ground beside the torrent, to the point where the streams, coming
respectively from the Ortzviri glacier, and from the smaller ice-stream which
descends from the east face of the mountain, unite. A narrow track mounted, by
zigzags, the bluff which projects between the two branches of the glen. A long
and steep ascent, which was beguiled by the variety and beauty of the flowers,
led up to a gently-sloping meadow, such as in the Alps would have been occupied
by a group of chalets. a little beyond which the horse was left, although he
might have gone farther without difficulty. We were now close to the snout of
the Ortzviri glacier, which, as before mentioned, sweeps round the southern
flank of Kazbek, aud, despite many remonstrances from the porters, already
getting beyond their beat, we climbed on, up the steep slopes on its left bank,
until at 2.30 P.M. — at a height of 11,000 feet — we found a most suitable spot
for a bivouac. It was a mossy plot, in a hollow protected on one side by the
moraine, on the other by the great southern spur of Kazbek. Here we pitched our
tent, and under Francois’ superintendence established our cuisine, which turned
out some excellent soup, broiled ham, and a brew of mulled wine. We should have
been happy enough, but for the very doubtful appearance of the weather. Soon
after our arrival there was a sharp shower of rain, followed by hail, succeeded
in its turn by a violent wind, which, when we retired for the night, about 7
o’clock, was roaring in a way suggestive of anything rather than an ascent of
Kazbek next morning.

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption }
![KAZBEK FROM THE SOUTH.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0197.jpg "KAZBEK FROM THE SOUTH."){#b197}
::::

*July 1st.* — The cold in the night was not excessive, and we slept in a broken
sort of way till 1 A.M., when we rose, and began to prepare for a start; but it
was not until 2.45, after more than the usual petty delays, that we — that is
Moore, Tucker, and I, with Francois — were fairly off on our adventure. Before
leaving the tent we had by prearrangement fired off a pistol, to give notice to
the porters, who had retired to lairs at some little distance, and out of sight;
but no one answered, and we heard nothing of them until we were just starting,
when there was a distant howl, to which we in our turn made no response, the
fact being that we were not anxious for the company of our friends, who in any
serious difficulty would probably have been more of an hindrance than help. We
therefore started alone, carrying only our rope, and sufficient provisions for
the day,

Our camp must have been very close to the deserted cells, afterwards described
to us by Mons. Khatissian, and it is quite possible that the porters, who, we
remarked at the time, went off with the air of knowing what they were about, and
did not waste time in looking for holes among the rocks close at hand, may have
sought shelter in them. Such conduct would not agree with the superstitious
fears the natives are said to feel of the spot, but our men may have thought
that, having gone so far already, it did not much matter what they did further.

The morning was calm and lovely, and we fully enjoyed the moonlight view of the
great glacier and ice-mailed peaks around, and the glorious sunrise-flush which
soon succeeded it. We mounted along gentle snow-slopes between the glacier and
the mass of Kazbek, and gradually rounded the base of the eastern peak of the
mountain. Arrived at some rocks, beyond which the tributary glacier from between
the two summits joined the main stream, we halted to put on the rope, and Moore
left his new Cardigan waistcoat under a rock, intending to pick it up on our
return. As will be seen we never did return.

We now began to climb the face of the mountain — at first by rocks, afterwards
by broken slopes of névé — and gained height rapidly, bearing somewhat towards
the base of the western summit. At 6.50 A.M. we were at an altitude of 14,800
feet, only 1,800 feet below the top. At this time the view was magnificent and
perfectly clear; some fine snowy peaks, which we afterwards knew better as the
Adai Khokh group, were conspicuous to the west; to the south the eye already
ranged over the main chain of the Caucasus, and across the valley of the Kur, to
the hills beyond; while behind the rugged ridges which rise on the east of the
Terek valley, the peaks of Daghestan raised their snowy heads. From this point
our difficulties began; the crevasses became large, and had to be dodged.
Francois resigned the lead to Tucker for forty minutes, during which the
favouring snow-slope was exchanged for blue ice, covered with a treacherous four
inches of loose snow. The work of cutting steps became laborious, and Francois
presently resumed the lead. An incident soon occurred which might have been
serious. A bergschrund, a huge icicle-fringed crack in the ice, three to four
feet wide, of which the upper lip was about five feet above the under, barred
our progress. Francois was first, I followed, Tucker was behind me. and Moore
last. We had all passed the obstacle without serious difficulty, when the rope,
which in the passage had got somewhat slack, was discovered to have hitched
itself round one of the big icicles in the crack. Tucker, having, from the
position in which he was standing, in vain tried to unhitch it, began to cut
steps downwards to the upper lip of the crevasse. At no time is it an easy thing
to cut steps in ice beneath you; try to do it in a hurry, and what happened in
this case is almost sure to occur. The step-cutter overbalanced himself, his
feet slipped out of the shallow footholds, and he shot at once over the chasm;
of course the rope immediately tightened with a severe jerk on Moore and myself,
who, though very insecurely placed, fortunately were able to resist the strain.
Tucker had fallen, spreadeagle-fashion, with his head down the slope, and we had
to hold for many seconds before he could work himself round and regain his
footing.

The escape was a very narrow one, and we had reason to be thankful that neither
the rope nor our axes had failed us at so critical a moment. So startling an
occurrence naturally shook our nerves somewhat, but little was said, and our
order being re-established, we attacked the exceedingly steep ice-slope, which
separated us from the gap between the two summits. For the next four hours there
was scarcely one easy step. The ice, when not bare, was thinly coated with snow.
A long steep ice-slope is bad enough in the first state, as mountain-climbers
know, but it is infinitely worse in the second, In bare ice a secure step may be
cut; through loose incoherent snow it cannot. Francois went through the form of
cutting, but it was of little use to the two front men, and none at all to those
in the rear. In many places we found the safest plan was to crawl up on our
hands and knees, clinging with feet and ice-axes to the slippery staircase. It
has always remained a mystery to us how we got from step to step without a slip.
The difficulties of the feat were increased by a bitter wind, which swept across
the slope in fitful blasts of intense fury, driving the snow in blinding showers
into our faces as we crouched down for shelter, and numbing our hands to such a
degree that we could scarcely retain hold of our axes.

Time passes rapidly in such circumstances, and it was not until 11 A.M., when
Francois was again exhausted by the labour of leading, that we gained the saddle
between the two summits. There was no doubt now that the eastern peak was the
highest; at this we were well pleased, as, in such a wind as was raging, the
passage of the exceedingly narrow ridge leading to the western summit would have
been no pleasant task. Snatching a morsel of food, we left Francois to recover
himself, and started by ourselves, Tucker leading. The final climb was not
difficult; a broad bank of hard snow led to some rocks; above lay more snow,
succeeded by a second and larger patch of rocks (where Francois rejoined us),
which in their turn merged in the final snow-cupola of the mountain. A few steps
brought us to the edge of the southern cliffs, along which we mounted. The
snow-ridge ceased to ascend, and then fell away before us. It was just midday
when we saw beneath us the valley of the Terek, and knew that the highest point
of Kazbek was under our feet. The cold, owing to the high wind, would not allow
us to stop on the actual crest; but we sat down half a dozen feet below it, and
tried to take in as much as possible of the vast panorama before us.

Clouds had by this time risen in the valleys, and covered the great northern
plain, but the mountain-peaks were for the most part clear. The apparent
grandeur of the ranges to the east was a surprise. Group beyond group of snowy
peaks stretched away to the far-off Basardjusi (14,722 feet), the monarch of the
Eastern Caucasus. Nearer, and therefore more conspicuous, was the fine head of
Schebulos (14,781 feet). On the western horizon we eagerly sought Elbruz, but it
was not to be found; whether veiled by clouds, or hidden behind the Koschtantau
group, we could not say. We fancied afterwards that we recognised Kazbek from
Elbruz: of course in this case the converse is possible. Except in the immediate
vicinity of Kazbek, there seemed to be but few and small glaciers nearer than
the Adai Khokh group, on the further side of the Ardon valley.

After a stay of about ten minutes, we quitted the summit, where it was
impossible to leave any trace of our visit. We could not spare an ice-axe, to
fix upon the snow-dome, and the rocks were too big to use for building a stone
man. In a quarter of an hour we regained the gap, and then held a council. From
the commencement of our difficulties our minds had been troubled about how we
should get down, though, fortunately for our success, they had been more
pressingly occupied with the business of the ascent. Now, however, the question
had to be fairly faced — how were we to descend the ice-slope we had climbed
with so much difficulty? With a strong party— that is, a party with a due
proportion of guides, and when good steps can be cut — there is no more delicate
mountaineering operation than the descent of a really steep iceslope. Our party
was not a strong one, and on this particular slope it was practically impossible
to cut steps at all. A bad slip would result in the roll of the whole party for
at least 2,000 feet, unless cut short by one of the numerous crevasses on the
lower part of the mountain. The exact manner of its termination would, however,
probably be matter of difference when that termination came.

We were unanimously of opinion that an attempt to return by our morning’s route
would end in disaster, and that a way must be sought in another direction. This
could only be on the northern flank of the mountain, and it was satisfactory to
see that, for a long distance on that side, there was no serious difficulty. A
steep slope of snow (not ice) fell away from our feet to a great névé-plateau,
which we knew must pour down glaciers into the glens which open into the Terek
valley below the Kazbek station. A very few minutes’ consideration determined us
to follow this line, abandoning for the time our camp and the porters on the
south side of the mountain. The first hundred feet of descent down the hard
snow-bank were steep enough; I was ahead, and neglected to cut good steps, an
error which resulted in Moore’s barometer getting a jolt which upset it for
several hours. Happily, the little thing recovered during the night, and told us
our approximate heights for many a day afterwards. Very soon the slope became
gentle enough to allow us to dispense with axework, and we trudged straight and
steadily downwards, until we were almost on the level of the extensive
snowfields upon which we had looked from above. Here we again halted, to
consider our further course. We were on an unknown snow-plain, at a height of
14,000 feet above the sea, and it was most undesirable to hazard our chance of
reaching *terra cognita* ere nightfall by any rash or hasty move. One plan
suggested was to turn to the left, and cross a pass we had good reason to
believe connected the plateau we were on with the névé of the glacier by which
we had ascended. This course, if successfully carried out, would have brought us
back to our tent and baggage, but its probable length was a fatal objection.
Eventually we determined to keep nearly due north, across the snowfield, towards
a ridge which divides two glaciers flowing into different branches of the gen of
Devdorak, We descended, for some distance under the rocks, along the left bank
of the most southerly of the two glaciers, until the ice became so steep and
broken that further progress promised to be difficult; we therefore halted,
while Francois climbed up again to the ridge, and made a reconnaissance on its
northern side.

After some delay, a shout from above called on us to follow, and we rejoined
Francois, after a sharp scramble, at the base of a very remarkable tower of rock
which crowns the ridge, and is visible even from the Dariel road. It will be
useful as a finger-post to future climbers.

The view of Kazbek from here is superb; its whole north-eastern side is a sheet
of snow and ice, broken by the steepness of the slope into magnificent towers,
and seamed by deep-blue chasms. We were glad to find that there was a reasonable
prospect of descending from our eyrie to the lower world without too much
difficulty. The crest of the ridge between the two glaciers fell rapidly before
us, and offered for some way an easy route. We followed it — sometimes crossing
a snowy plain, sometimes hurrying down rocky banks — until we saw beneath us, on
our left, a series of long snow-slopes leading directly to the foot of the
northern glacier. Down these we glissaded merrily, and at 5.30 halted on the
rocks below the end of the glacier, which was of considerable size, and backed
by two lofty summits. The view of the lower part of the glen was shut out by a
rocky barrier, and before we reached its brow, mists, which we had previously
observed collecting in the hollow, swept round us, and for the next two hours we
were enveloped in a dense fog. A long snow-filled gully brought us to the bottom
of the gorge, of which we could see but little, owing to the unfortunate state
of the atmosphere. It must be of the most savage. description. The torrent was
buried under the avalanches of many winters; huge walls of crag loomed through
the mist, and pressed us so closely on either side, that, but for the path
afforded by the avalanche snows, we should have been puzzled to find a means of
exit. This aid at last failed us, the stream burst itself free, and tumbled into
a gorge. After a laborious scramble for some distance over huge boulders, we
found it impossible to follow it any farther, and therefore made a sharp but
short ascent to the right, when Francois happily hit on a faint track, which led
us by steep zigzags into the same glen again, at a lower point. After more than
once missing and re-finding the path, we rounded an angle of the valley, and,
the mists having lifted somewhat, saw that we were close to the junction of our
torrent with that from the main Devdorak glacier. On the grassy brow between the
two streams cows and goats were grazing, and as it was now 7.45 P.M., we debated
on the propriety of stopping here for the night. The question was decided by the
information we got from the herdsmen, an old man and two boys, who proved to be
very decent fellows. All communication, except by pantomime, was of course
impossible; but necessity sharpens the wits, and we gathered from them, without
much difficulty, that the Devdorak torrent was bridgeless and big, and that they
had fresh milk, and would allow us to share their shelter. It was only a hollow
under a partially overhanging cliff surrounded by a low wall, which was but a
poor protection against the attacks of inquisitive sheep and goats, who invaded
us several times during the night, and succeeded in carrying off and eating some
gloves and gaiters. Despite these inroads, and a Scotch mist, which fell pretty
heavily from time to time, we managed, with stones for pillows and our
mackintoshes spread over us, to snatch a good deal of sleep.

*July 2nd.* — As we had not even taken off our boots, the preparations for our
start in the morning did not occupy long. Our aged host accompanied us to the
Devdorak torrent, which at this time of day, before the heat of the sun had
melted the upper snows, could be waded without serious difficulty; and one of
the boys volunteered to accompany us to the post-station, and relieve Francois
of some of our traps. A well-marked path led us over grassy knolls considerably
above and to the right of the united torrents. On a brow near stands, we were
afterwards told, a pile of stones resembling in shape an altar, and covered with
the horns of chamois and bonquetin, This is a spot held sacred by the pagan
inhabitants of the neighbouring village of Goslet, and once a year they all
repair hither, sing strange chants, and make their offerings to the *genius
loci.* His name, according to our informant, is Daba, and that of the tribe who
worship him is Kists. Before very long the defile of the Dariel opened beneath
us, and a short descent brought us to the Terek. We kept for half-a-mile on the
left bank, along a meadow covered with old tombstones, and then crossed by the
bridge close to the stone hovels of Goslet, situated in a most savage nook at
the mouth of a ravine. We had still a long uphill pull of eight versts (51
miles) to the village of Kazbek; but towards the end we were able to cut short
the zigzags of the road, and about 9 A.M. aroused, with our best ❛jödels❜ the
people of the poststation. Our arrival did not at first create much excitement;
everyone seemed to take it as a matter of course that we had not been to the top
of the mountain, but equally as a matter of course that we should say we had.
The first thing to be done was to rout up Paul, who, still unable to shake off
his fever, was in a very stupid and gloomy mood, expecting death hourly. Through
him we sent up a messenger to look for our porters, whom we had left encamped,
at a height of 11,000 feet, the previous morning. The commission was promptly
executed, and in the course of the evening the porters returned, bringing in
safety all our belongings. Even a pair of spectacles, mislaid in the hurry of a
start in the dark, had been picked up, and were now restored to their owner. The
men, who naturally had supposed us lost, and felt uneasy as to what the
authorities would say to their having allowed us to go on alone, were overjoyed
to see us again, and now simultaneously talked, kissed, and hugged us all,
including Francois. The excitement among the villagers grew intense; the porters
told them that we had disappeared up the mountain, and that our tracks were
visible to a great height on the southern face; the shepherd-boy, who had
arrived with us, was a witness to our mysterious appearance on the other side
the same evening. The two facts showed that we must have crossed the mountain
very near the top, and been, at any rate, thousands of feet higher than those
before us, and we suddenly found ourselves installed as heroes, instead of
humbugs, in the public opinion of Kazbek village. Two of the porters even
thought it worth while to allege that, searching for us on the second day, they
had followed in our footsteps to the top; but this bold fiction was only
intended to raise their reputation at home, and they did not press it on our
acceptance, or make it the ground of any moneyclaim.

The old men’s chorus, by whose help our first arrangements were made, came in
during our supper, when more kissing and hugging had to be endured. The chief of
the party was very excited and enthusiastic in his congratulations, and dilated
at length on the Generals and Colonels, who, with companies of Cossacks to aid
them, had desired to do what we had done, and had failed. We tried to explain to
him the use of the rope and the ice-axe, and to show that such aids were much
more useful on a snowmountain than any number of Cossacks. The Grand Dukes had
passed during our absence, and had carried away the officials with them; we had
promised to let them know how we fared, and accordingly wrote a short account of
the ❛happy despatch❜ of Kazbek, which we sent to the Commandant of Duschet,
leaving it to his discretion to publish it in the *Kafkaz*, the official journal
of Tiflis.

In that publication it finally appeared, and contributed in no slight degree to
the reputation of modern Munchausens, which before leaving the country we had
sueceeded in establishing.

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0700]: [I follow the most eminent modern geographers in considering the Caucasian watershed as part of the boundary between Europe and Asia. Though this conclusion has been for many years generally adopted, the public and their instructors are, as vet, scarcely awake to the necessary corollary that Mont Blanc and Monte Rosa must be regarded as usurpers, and that Elbruz and Kazbek, Koschtantau and Dychtau, are entitled to precedence on the roll of European mountains.]{.footnote}

[^0701]: [Mquinvari is the best known.]{.footnote}

[^0702]: [Mons. L. Favre, of Geneva a well-known geologist who visited the Devdorak glacier a few weeks after ourselves, came to the following conclusion as to the nature of the catastrophe. No avalanche. he says. could without the aid of water traverse the space between the end of the glacier and the Terek, and he accounts for the disasters which have taken place in the following way. He believes the Devdorak glacier, to which he finds a parallel in the Rofen Vernagt glacier in the Ötzthal Alps, to be subject to periods of sudden advance. During these the ice finds no sufficient space to spread itself out in the narrow gorge into which it is driven, and is consequently forced by the pressure from behind into so compact a mass that the ordinary water-channels are stopped, and the whole drainage of the glacier is pent-up beneath its surface. Sooner or later the accumulated waters burst open their prison, carrying away with them the lower portion of the glacier. A mingled flood of snow aud ice, increased by earth and rocks torn from the hillsides in its passage, sweeps down the glen of Devdorak. Issuing into the main valley it spreads from side to side, and dams the Terek. A lake is formed, and increases in size until it breaks through its barrier, and inundates the Dariel gorge and the lower valley.<br /> Mons. Favre has also printed a paper, entitled ❛Les Causes des Avalanches du Glacier du Kasbek, par le Colonel Statkowski, extrait du Journal du Ministére des Voies et Communications, 1866,❜ which contains an explicit statement as to the most recent catastrophe. The Colonel says: ❛The last avalanche of the Glacier of Devdorak fell in 1832, In 1842 and in 1855 similar disasters were expected, but did not take place.❜]{.footnote}
