# CHAPTER VIII.<br /><small> THE VALLEYS OF THE TEREK, ARDON, AND RION. </small>{#eight .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
A Geographical Disquisition — The Upper Terek — Savage Scenery — Ferocious Dogs
— Abano — A Dull Walk— Hard Bargaining — An Unruly Train — A Pass — Zacea, on
the Ardon — A Warm Skirmish and a Barren Victory — An Unexpected Climb — The
Lower Valley  — A Russian Road — Teeb — The Ossetes — The Mamisson Pass — Adai
Khokh — A Shift in the Scenery — Gurschavi — The Boy-Prince — An Idle Day —
View from the Rhododendron Slope — Glola — The Pine-Forests of the Rion —
Chiora.
<br /><br />
::::

*July 3rd.* — It was less than a week since we had left Tiflis, and already the
first piece in our programme was accomplished, and the most formidable of the
two great peaks we had pledged ourselves to attack successfully disposed of. We
had now to turn our thoughts to the less imposing, but really far more
difficult, task of making our way along the foot of the main chain of the
Caucasus, from Kazbek to Elbruz, a distance, as the crow flies, of 120 miles.
Before leaving England we had studied German maps, which, although shown, by
better acquaintance with the country, to be often inaccurate, yet gave a
sufficiently correct idea of the disposition of the upper valleys, on either
side of the watershed, to enable us to form a plan for our proposed ❛high-level
route.❜ Since landing at Poti, we had learnt that the Mamisson, one of the
passes we intended to cross, was well known to, and occasionally used by, the
Russians, as a route between Vladikafkas and Kutais. Beyond this we could gain
from the officials little information, and the plan of the journey we had worked
out was scouted by them as impracticable. A volume given me by Herr Radde,
containing the account of his explorations in the higher valleys of Mingrelia,
showed us that he had traversed, at different times, all the country west of the
Mamisson, to a point south of Elbruz, with the exception of one short link,
between the valleys of the Rion and Zenes-Squali. It is one thing to make
excursions from a base to which you can return for supplies, and where you can
leave much of your baggage, and another to push on from point to point, carrying
everything with you, and harassed by the constant difficulty of engaging fresh
porters. We saw no reason, however, to give up our original plan, despite the
small encouragement it had received from others, and accordingly were ready on
the morning after our return from the ascent of Kazbek, to drive back to Kobi,
where we purposed to bid farewell to post-roads and such civilization as they
carry with them, and to adventure ourselves among the primitive paths, and
native inhabitants of the mountains.

Before I enter upon the account of our journey, and its various adventures, I
must ask my readers to open the map, and to look at the disposition of the
ridges and valleys amongst which we are about to wander together. It will be
seen that the watershed of the Western Caucasus, from a point south of Elbruz to
the Adai Khokh group, on the west of the Ardon valley, is an uninterrupted and
tolerably straight ridge, which nowhere sinks below 10,000 feet, and is
traversed only by glacier-passes, some of them practicable indeed to Caucasian
horses, but even those equal to the well-known Theodule in the extent of snow
and ice to be crossed. This central mass, according to the testimony of recent
geologists, confirmed in most parts by our own unskilled observation is mainly
composed of granite. On either side, but more especially on the south, the upper
valleys are troughs running parallel to the central chain, and thereby aiding
the traveller who wishes to explore it. These upper basins are enclosed between
the main chain and the lower but very considerable limestone ridges, which guard
both its flanks. The rivers rising in the glaciers of the central mass are
consequently compelled to make their way to the low country by deep gorges cut
through the lateral ranges. In this part of the chain, that is from Suanetia on
the west, to the eastern source of the Rion, the relations of the watershed and
the two lateral ridges, though sometimes interrupted or rendered indistinct (as
by the sources of the Zenes-Squali, on the south, or by the great promontory of
Dych-Tau on the north), are on the whole easily traceable. The next section
eastwards presents at first sight, on the map, a curiously changed aspect; the
watershed having for so large a space run from north-west to south-east, bends
suddenly due south, and sinks to the comparatively low gap of the Mamisson Pass.
After a few miles it resumes its former direction, but entirely fails to recover
its former grandeur, and although the peaks rise frequently to heights of 11,000
and 12,000 feet, they support but few and small glaciers, while the passes
between them vary from 7,500 feet, the height of the Krestowaja Gora, to 9,000
feet. North of this insignificant watershed, we find a line of summits averaging
at least 14,000 feet, and terminating in the noble outwork of Kazbek, 16,540
feet. A second glance at the map shows that these grand peaks are in an exact
line with the glacier-crowned chain which forms the watershed further west, and
that the ridge which now divides the basins of the Kur and the Terek is, in
fact, the continuation of the southern lateral range. I have only further to
point out that the head-waters of the Terek and the Ardon are divided by a low
ridge, which connects the Kazbek group with the watershed. If thus much of the
geography of the Western Caucasus has been made clear, my readers will be as
well able to see, as we were when we left Kobi, the obvious line of march for a
party who wished to follow as closely as possible the foot of the main chain,
where the finest scenery might be expected to be found. Our plan was to ascend
the Terek to its source, cross to the Ardon, descend the eastern, and mount the
western branch of that river, traverse the main chain by the Mamisson Pass, and
then work across the upper basins of the Rion and the Ingur, between which
several ridges separating the sources of the Zenes-Squali barred the way, and
enclosed glens seemingly without inhabitants.

I have here attempted to give some idea of the physical configuration of that
part only of the Caucasus which we visited, and have not entered into details of
the complicated system of mountains and river-basins of Daghestan, famous as the
last refuge of Schamyl and the scene of his final capture.

We started from Kazbek station, on July 3rd, in grand style. Our turn-out
consisted of the best pair of telegas we met with in Russia, with good horses,
which had drawn the Grand Dukes two days previously, and had, in consequence,
their harness still intertwined with gay ribbons. The day was gloomy, and before
Tong the rain, of which during the month we were destined to have more than our
share, began to fall in torrents, so that, despite mackintoshes, we arrived at
Kobi wet through. The postmaster was in his usual state of intoxication, but we
succeeded in getting a fire lighted, and then sent for the head of the Cossacks
stationed there, who had been ordered by the Commandant of Duschet to have
horses ready to carry our baggage. We found that two animals had been procured,
but that they could not go with us beyond Res, the highest village in the Terek
valley, the pass from which into Dwaleth, as the Upper Ardon valley is called,
was said to be impracticable for laden animals. The rain-storm having passed
over, we set out on foot, with our baggage packed on the two horses, which were
accompanied by their owners.

The portion of the valley immediately above Kobi is bare and uninteresting; long
and steep grass-slopes shut in the view, and no snowy peaks are visible. We
walked along swampy meadows as far as a spot where the valley forks, and the
main torrent comes out of a narrow opening on the left. Our path then followed
the left bank of the Terek, through a long and savage but scarcely picturesque
defile. Huge avalanches had fallen in spring down the gullies, and in many
places still covered the path; from the traces we saw here and elsewhere of
their ravages, far exceeding the devastations caused by similar agency in the
Alps, we were led to suppose that the winter snowfall is heavier in the Caucasus
than in Switzerland. Mineral springs abounded, some of which were impregnated
with iron, and coloured the ground for many yards round their source. An
abominable stench which pervaded one part of the defile probably arose from a
sulphur spring, although Paul tried to persuade us it was caused by the decay of
the vegetation lying amongst the débris of the avalanches. We emerged, after a
time, into the upper valley — an open basin perfectly bare, and surrounded by
uniform slopes capped by rock-peaks of a very commonplace character. The nearer
beauties of nature were more conspicuous, and the carpet of flowers, which
almost hid the grass under our feet, consoled us for the rather disappointing
tameness of the general scenery. As we suddenly turned a corner, we came upon a
group of natives sitting on a bank of turf, and amusing themselves with music
and singing. They were a handsome set of men, tall and military-looking, dressed
in the usual long frock-coat and high fur hat of the Ossetes, and carrying about
their persons the indispensable variety of swords, daggers, guns, and pistols.
They rose to meet us, and, after a few minutes' friendly conversation, we passed
on our way. After a walk of three hours from Kobi, we came in sight of Kektris
and Abano, two villages about half a mile apart, and both on the left side of
the valley. There being no wood in this district, the houses are entirely built
of stone: they are generally gloomy-looking masses of rough masonry, in which
small holes are left for the windows; but the peculiar character of the villages
is given by the number of towers, which are often found in the proportion of two
towers to three houses. There is nothing picturesque in these primitive
fortresses, which, from their walls sloping inwards towards the top, closely
resemble, from a distance, a collection of exaggerated brick-kilns many of them
are in ruins. In passing through Kektris we were put in bodily fear by the dogs
— a magnificent race, as big as the St. Bernard, and of the same colour, but
with shaggier coats and even more sagacious faces. The narrow lane wound along
between the houses, on the roofs of which our enemies took their stand, greeting
us with savage barking and every demonstration of a desire to rush down and eat
us. I believe, however, that this ferocity is more apparent than real. At Abano
our horsemen selected a lodging for us at the house of the wealthiest man in the
village, where we found a clean upper room with two bedsteads. Supper was
promised, and we had nothing to complain of in our reception, as a samovar was
quickly brought and a fowl slaughtered for our benefit.

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption }
![An Ossete Village.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0213.jpg "An Ossete Village."){#b213}
::::

*July 4th.* — In the morning a dispute arose with our host as to the payment we
should make, and we were obliged to resist his excessive demands. The valley did
not increase in interest as we mounted it. There are few duller walks in a
mountain country than that from Abano to Gumara; the trough of the Terck is
bare, and destitute of any natural attractions, and a glimpse of the fine snowy
head of Gumaran Khokh, up a side glen, forms but a momentary relief to the
general dulness. This part of the Kazbek group deserves exploration; its
glaciers and ridges are laid down in the vaguest way on the Five Verst Map, and
the only fact I can state concerning it is, that it sends out a large
ice-stream, known as the Gumaran glacier, the head of which probably abuts on
that of Orzviri. From hence to Res the distance was not great, and the change in
the scenery showed that we were drawing close to the head of the valley. The
slopes became less uniform, while bolder and loftier summits rose around us. The
hamlet of Res, where our baggage-horses were to be left, is a cluster of stone
hovels, perched one above the other on a steep hillside. We unladed our packs in
the middle of it, and sitting down on some stones began our lunch, while the
question of porterage was discussed with the inhabitants, who of course soon
gathered round us. They were a handsome but ruffianly-looking lot, but we had
become too much accustomed during the last six months to find ourselves among
queer company to think much of their appearance. The first demand made was that
we should hire ten men to carry our luggage to Zacca, the highest village in the
Ardon valley, and that we should pay them two roubles apiece, which would have
made the whole sum twenty roubles, or 2l. 15s. We offered them half, which they
at first contemptuously refused, but finally accepted, when we, as a stratagem,
ordered the horses to be reladen, and pretended to be about to return the way we
had come. The packs, which were ludicrously light (not above one-third of the
weight ordinarily carried by Swiss peasants), having been with much difficulty
and loss of time adjusted, we started for the pass, which was now visible in
front of us. A strong stream, flowing out of a snowy hollow in the northern
chain, had to be crossed, and gave some trouble to those who attempted to
perform the feat dryshod. The men made the passage an excuse for a long delay
while they rearranged their shoes.

The sandals of the mountaineers of the Caucasus are too peculiar to he passed
over without a description. A tangle of leather bands is stuffed with dry grass
and bound round the foot, so that the sole is renewable at pleasure; these
remarkable boots seem to be everlasting, and at the same time to afford the feet
sufficient protection from rocks and cold. For along time we thought they would
fail when brought into contact with snow and ice, but the way in which the men
of Pari crossed the steep snow-slopes between the valleys of the Nakra and the
Baksan in them, quite disabused our minds of this prejudice. Such being the
ordinary style of shoe of the country, it may be imagined what surprise our
doublesoled and heavily-nailed English boots created, and we used often to hold
up our feet, as a show, in the villages, while some arithmetical genius
endeavoured to count the nails in the soles. The last sandal having been
satisfactorily strapped and re-arranged, our train moved on.

The path, a fairly-marked one, steadily rose above the Terek, the highest source
of which was now in sight, issuing from a small glacier at the base of Zilga
Khokh, a fine peak at the point where the ridge over which our pass lay joins
the watershed. Numerous springs burst out of the hillside, and their channels
were bright with masses of the yellow blossoms of the ranunculus. The final
climb to the pass was up a steep slope of shale, on which a good deal of snow
was still lying. Our native companions were silly enough to prefer a straight
course to the well-made zigzags of the path, the pains expended on the
construction of which caused us some surprise; the rest of the party, however,
stuck to the zigzags, except Moore, who kept with the porters, in order to have
an eye on their dealings with our goods. As they soon lost breath, and wanted
every minute to sit down, he had enough to do to drive them before him, and his
difficulties suggested to our minds a comparison between his present position
and that of Enid when driving the unruly steeds before her through the waste. By
our several routes we all arrived at nearly the same point on the ridge, which
is over 10,000 feet in height. The actual crest was bare, but plenty of snow lay
around; there was nothing, however, to prevent horses, so accustomed to
snow-work as those of the Caucasus, from crossing the pass. The view looking
back towards Kazbek, and forwards to what must, I suppose in deference to the
Five Verst Map, be called the Adai Khokh group, ought to have been fine; but
unluckily clouds hid all the more distant summits, and we saw little more than
the bold mass of Ziloa Khokh close at hand on the south. This summit (12,645
feet) was ascended, in 1852, by General Chodzko, who spent several days near the
top for the purpose of the government survey. He describes the expedition as a
difficult one, and seems to have encountered considerable glacier obstacles. The
path, on the western side of the pass, first bore away to the right, and then
descended rapidly into a green basin, such as is familiar to all Alpine
travellers; a pass lower than that we had just crossed led out of it on the
south, across the watershed, immediately to the west of Zilga Kholkh.

We looked forward with mingled pleasure and dread to the necessity of making
fresh arrangements for the transport of our baggage: on the one hand we were
only too delighted to be rid of the Res men, who had been most provokingly
insolent during the descent; on the other, we dreaded a prolonged wrangle before
a fresh bargain could be concluded. On reaching Zacca we suceeeded in finding a
house, the owner of which was willing to get us something to eat, and on a
raised terrace outside, we sat down and collected together our luggage. A crowd
immediately surrounded us, and soon, not content with staring, pushed in and
jostled us so roughly, that we asked the man who had promised to secure us some
bread whether he could not also find us a room to rest in. He pointed out one
close by, and by stationing Francois at the door, we managed to free ourselves
from the inquisitiveness of the mob, and to confine our visitors to a select few
of the elders, whom we entertained by displaying some of our European
knickknacks, such as knives, telescopes, and portable drinkingcups. As soon as
we had got all our goods into our own hands, Paul was given the 10 roubles to
pay to the porters. This was handed over, and at first quietly accepted, but
they soon began to clamour for an extra rouble as backsheesh, or trinkgeld, or
whatever is the Ossete synonym for those well-known terms. We having just sought
refuge from the jabber and jostling of the outside crowd, were not drawn out
again by the every-day sound of angry voices, and it was not till the row became
serious that we sallied forth, Moore and Tucker going first. They found the Res
men hustling Paul, who was sputtering with rage, while the villagers looked on
and laughed. When my friends appeared, one of the scoundrels snatched at Paul’s
sheepskin cloak, and then they all hastily retired, carrying it with them. This
was the state of the matter when I came upon the scene, and saw Paul frantically
excited, and our late porters standing in a knot on the path, fifty yards off,
with our cloak in their possession. Knowing nothing of what had gone before, and
remembering the effect any decided course of action generally has with Easterns,
I fancied a prompt move would settle the question, and accordingly ran up to the
men of Res, and, taking hold of the cloak, motioned to them to drop it. They had
no such intention, and began instead to pommel me in their own way, which
fortunately was a very harmless one, consisting of roundabout pats on the top of
the head. This, no doubt, is an effectual mode of bonneting an adversary who
wears a tall sheepskin, but it is singularly harmless to a man with a hard
wideawake. In self-defence I was obliged to let go the cloak, and in a few
seconds my friends came to the rescue, Tucker hitting straight into the eyes of
the thieves, while Moore charged down the hill with the point of his ice-axe
directed full at their stomachs, and Francois lent the weight of his elephantine
bulk to the united onset. After Tucker had been rolled down the embankment on
which the skirmish took place, and some dozen blows had been planted fairly in
the thieves’ faces, the foe suddenly fled, and did not stop till they had put
the river between themselves and us. We thus remained masters of the field, but
the enemy had all the fruits of victory, as they got clear off with their booty
we consoled ourselves, however, in the smallness of our loss, and in the fact of
our retaining a very fine staff which Paul had borrowed, and which afterswards
served him as an alpenstock during our whole journey.

Our next move was to turn the the chief of the village and ask how it was that
he stood by and allowed strangers to be robbed, whilst his own people aided and
abetted the thieves? The only reply of this specimen of nature’s nobility was,
that if we would give him something for his trouble he would get us back the
cloak, an offer which I need hardly say we declined to accept. The looks of the
population were not friendly, and we came to the conclusion that it was better
to submit to extortion in engaging horses, than by delay to run any risk of
further robbery. We consequently agreed with two handsome smartly-dressed
follows to start down the valley at once, with two horses. We were heartily glad
to shake the dust of Zacca off our feet, and to feel ourselves once more on the
road with only two, instead of ten, of these impracticable mountaineers to deal
with. The valley is treeless, but the scenery is far superior to that of the
Upper Terek. The slopes are varied and broken, jagged peaks show at the head of
lateral glens on the south, and clusters of houses, each dominated by one or
more towers, are perched on every defensible rock-knoll. We climbed on to a
level-topped green brow at some height on the left bank of the stream, then made
a dip into a lateral ravine, on the opposite bank of which we passed another
hamlet. The map showed that this was the last of the upper cluster of villages,
and after some discussion we halted a few minutes further on at a solitary house
by the wayside. A large empty barn was our quarters for the night, and as we
were able to add eggs and milk to the provisions we carried with us, we did not
fare badly for supper. The position of affairs during the evening was not
pleasant, as the manner of our horsemen was insolent and suspicious, and led us
to apprehend an attack in the night. In order, therefore, to let them see that
we were prepared to meet it, we had a grand review of our forces before retiring
— that is to say, we ostentatiously fired and reloaded our three revolvers, a
performance which excited considerable astonishment. The baggage was all
collected at one end of the barn, and we slept lightly; but the night passed
without disturbance, and I hope our suspicions of the men may have been
unfounded.

*July 5th.* — We had only engaged our horsemen for the previous evening, but
being unable to find others, we were obliged to retain their services at their
own valuation, which was of course an extravagant one. We expected to have an
easy stroll down one branch of the Ardon and up the other to the foot of the
Mamisson Pass, and meant to sleep at one of the villages on its eastern side.
Our first intention had been to leave Paul and the heavy baggage at Dalla-Kav,
at the fork of the torrents, and ourselves to descend the main valley for some
distance, and then turn up a lateral glen, which appears from the Five Verst Map
to be well wooded, and to contain at its head the largest glacier of the
Adai-Khokh group, over which we might have found a way back across the mountains
to our luggage. After the specimen the Ossetes had just given us of their
gentlemanlike behaviour, it seemed imprudent to separate our party, and to leave
our goods for an uncertain length of time at their mercy; so this idea was given
up, and we determined to push on, in the hope that the inhabitants of the Rion
valley would prove more friendly than their neighbours, and that from it Adai
Khokh might be accessible. We crossed the stream by a narrow footbridge
immediately below our night-quarters. The sheep and goats were at the same time
starting for the pasturage, and it was amusing to watch the way in which they
hustled one another in their eagerness to pass. The sheep would follow peaceably
enough for a minute, until an old goat made a dash into the crowd, upset a lamb
or two into the water, and not unfrequently overbalanced himself and got a
ducking. The stream was strong enough to give the poor lambs a good tossing
before they got on their legs again, and came out dripping and bleating from
their morning bath.

Nothing is more annoying than a mountain in your way when you have no reason to
expect it, and it was not without careful enquiry into the necessity of the
exertion that we consented to leave the valley, which our horsemen assured us
contracted below into an impassable gorge, and set our faces against a
mountainside of 2,500 feet. A good horsepath, mounted at first by very steep
zigzags, and then gradually crept along the top of a grassy ridge, and round the
head of a hollow, to the summit of a spur about 9,800 feet in height, whence we
looked down into another side-glen of the Ardon. This point commanded an
admirable panorama of the extraordinary chaos of mountains and network of
ravines which form the upper eastern basin of the Ardon. This river, like the
Rion, is formed by two torrents running parallel to the main chain as far as
their junction, whence their united streams turn suddenly at right-angles to
their former course, and force a way through the deep cleft which divides the
Adai Khokh and Kazbek groups. The range between the Mamisson and Zilga Khokh was
clear, and presented a line of bold rocky summits separated by deep gaps,
offering passes of from 8,000 to 10,000 feet in height into the southern
valleys. The mountain-range on the north is on a far grander scale, but clouds
unluckily hid all the tops of the Adai Khokh group, and we could see only the
tail of one glacier.

At the base of the projecting mass on which we stood, was a deep valley
terminated by a rocky cirque, above which a remarkably-pointed peak, called Tau
Teply, showed itself through the mists. When the clouds blew off, we saw that
the sharp rock-cone was supported by a long icy ridge, depriving the mountain of
some of its apparent boldness of outline. We were, not unnaturally, in the
constant habit of comparing Caucasian with Swiss scenery, as the best means
whereby to confirm or correct our first impressions. Thus far we were agreed
that in form the Caucasian peaks were at least as bold as the summits in the
most serrated portion of the Alpine range. The features missing in the valleys
of the Terek and Ardon are large glaciers and forests. The earth’s surface must
be wonderfully broken to render a district absolutely bare of trees anything but
monotonously savage; despite therefore some striking views, at points where
lofty peaks close either end of the valley, the scenery of the Upper Ardon must
be characterised as on the whole dull.

There was a good deal of snow on the path, but it was tolerably hard, and did
not cause any difficulty to the horses. After a last glance at the
mountain-encircled den from which we had just made our escape — probably one of
the most out-of-the-way corners of the Caucasus — we commenced the long but
pleasant descent which led down into the lower valley. The hillsides were gay
with flowers; near the snow we found gentians of two sorts, the common Alpine
variety, and one of a duller blue; further on masses of the white Caucasian
rhododendron, interspersed with pink ox-eyed daisies and orange-coloured
poppies, made us remark the curious difference in hue of the same flowers at
home and in the Caucasus.

The village at which we determined to make our midday halt is built on a narrow
hog’s-back, projecting between two streams. The people seemed a shade more
civilised than those we had left, and we were soon received in the house of one
of the villagers. A large and dark entrance, in which all sorts of implements
were stored, led to a more cheerful room, one side of which opened on a balcony
overlooking the torrent. The articles of furniture in the Ossete houses are few
but quaint; the greatest amount of pains is bestowed on the cradles and
armchairs. The former are elaborately ornamented; the latter are broad and
shallow, with a low carved back suited for Darby and Joan to sit in together,
but quite incapable of being used as places of rest. The tables are in shape
something between three-legged stools and the low velvet-covered pieces of
furniture now in fashion in London. In an inner room there were two raised
couches, over which the arms of the master of the house were hung up against the
wall. A large herd of horses was feeding in the meadows on the opposite side of
the river, where we also noticed a cluster of men whose number gradually
increased during our stay. We met with nothing but civility from our hosts, and
our horsemen were treated most liberally: when one of them had tossed off his
fourth tumbler of ❛vodka❜ us though it had been water, without being apparently
in the least the worse for it, we thought it about time to be off. We descended
to the stream, and crossed by a bridge to the meadow on its opposite bank. The
group which we had before noticed now advanced towards us, and a grizzled old
gentleman asked to see our permit to travel. Thinking that a British
Foreign-office passport might be beyond his comprehension, and at the same time
not wishing to raise a needless difficulty, I offered for inspection an old
❛crown-podorojno❜ . We were surrounded for some minutes by a curious crowd, but
in due time the paper was restored, the chief professed himself perfectly
satisfied, and we went on our way unmolested.

After crossing a tributary stream, and passing another gloomy-looking village,
we had a dull but easy walk along level meadows to the fork of the valley. The
numerous villages, alike in their rude stone houses and frequent towers, are
invariably perched on the hillsides, and often on the isolated promontories of
rock which form one of the peculiar features of this district. The defile
through which the Ardon flows out to the north seemed to be wooded in its lower
portion, but the western arm of the upper valley was as bare as that we had just
traversed; we crossed its torrent by a bridge, and mounted the further bank to
reach the track of the projected carriage-road from Vladikatkaz to Kutais over
the Mamisson Pass. The road has been traced, and partly cut along the hillsides,
but as wherever a mass of rock required blasting, nothing has been done, it is
of course impassable for vehicles: moreover, in many places torrents and
earthslips had already half destroyed the track, which appeared to have been
abandoned to its fate. Roadmaking is not a Russian virtue, and the authorities
are so little accustomed even at home to see anything which would be called a
road in Western Europe, that they are naturally slow in the appreciation of the
necessity of good highways in the Caucasus. If military purposes demand a means
of communication, soldiers are set to work, and one sufficient for the momentary
need is constructed; had all the roads which have been traced and cut, at
immense cost both of money and labour, been finished and kept in repair, the
Western Caucasus would now be very fairly provided with routes practicable for
light carriages, and much more would have been done towards the civilisation of
the country. The road now in question has some chance of completion, owing to
its obvious importance as the shortest line from Vladikafkaz to the Black Sea
coast. The Viceroy of the Caucasus passed this way in September last, and his
visit may perhaps have the effect of giving the needed impulse to the local
authorities. There was absolutely nothing to look at during the walk up the
western arm of the Ardon to Teeb. The track mounted gradually along the northern
side of the valley, passing above several villages surrounded by fields of
barley enclosed by untidy fences. We met a drove of colts being taken southwards
for sale; the Kabarda, a district of which I shall presently have more to say,
is celebrated for its breed of horses, and exports large numbers annually to the
markets of Tiflis and Kutais.

Teeb consists of several hamlets scattered on the hillside above and below the
road; we sent Paul to reconnoitre, and waited to learn the result of his
enquiries, which proved satisfactory, and we were installed in a clean little
room on the housetop. The people, living on a frequented path, and having had
troops quartered near them for many months, were more accustomed to see
passersby, and less churlish than those of the other branch of the valley. There
was even a priest in the village, who talked Russian, and assisted Paul in his
search for fowls and eggs, and his enquiries after fresh horses. The men who had
come with us from Zacca had evidently got beyond their home-circle, and did not
find anyone to treat them to ❛vodka❜; they consequently wanted to take up their
quarters with us, but we told them plainly that we thought them no better than
thieves, and wished to see no more of them. Having received their pay, they
loitered about the place for some time, casting longing glances at our numerous
belongings; but finding we were on the watch, and that there was no chance of
carrying off a field-glass or revolver, the objects which they looked at most
covetously, they took their departure before nightfall.

*July 6th.* — Paul had found two honest-looking men, who were willing to come
with us for three roubles (eight shillings) a day, for man and horse. This was
much above the price of the country, but was only half of what we had given the
Zacca men, and we gladly concluded the bargain; our new attendants turned out
pleasant and obliging, and we kept them with us for several days. Teeb was one
of the few places we had halted in since leaving the Dariel road, where we had
no reason to complain of churlishness or extortion of some sort; and the
friendliness of the villagers caused us to modify the otherwise universal
condemnation we felt disposed to pronounce against the Ossetes, of whom we now
took leave for the present. This tribe, one of the most famous of the Caucasus,
was converted at a very early period to Christianity, which they continue to
profess, although they trouble themselves little about either its letter or
spirit. Their worship is mixed up with sacrificial feasts, apparently of pagan
origin, and the doctrines they hold are compatible with a severe law of
vengeance, resulting in long and bloody feuds between families and villages.
There seems to be no poor class among them; all the men we saw were well and
even handsomely dressed. The tall sheepskin hat is universal, and great
attention is bestowed on the numerous ornamental details of their costume. The
cartridge-boxes on the breast are often inlaid with silver, and when they go
abroad they invariably wear a belt (generally silver), to which is attached a
double-edged dagger like the Roman short-sword, enclosed in an ornamental
sheath; on the other side hangs a heavy flint and steel pistol, in addition to a
variety of smaller necessaries, such as a leather case for tinder and flints, a
knife, and a little box of oxidised silver prettily worked, in which they keep
the grease to anoint their bullets. Their dresses are usually in good condition,
and a shabby or poor-looking man is hardly to be met with. Altogether it is
impossible not to admit that their external appearance is some excuse for the
title of ❛Gentlemen of the Mountains,❜ which Count Leverschoft gave them.

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption }
![An Ossete.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0227.jpg "An Ossete."){#b227}
::::

We were still at some distance from the head of the valley, the scenery of which
continued to be of the same monotonous description. About half an hour above
Teeb there was a fine view, looking back towards a great snowcrowned mass, a
western outpost of the Kazbek group. The track, gradually ascending by a uniform
gradient above the torrent, made long and frequent circuits round lateral
ravines, until, after passing several villages, the head-waters of the Ardon
opened before us, and the long straight valley broke up into several glens,
running up into a semicircle of peaks, several of which were remarkable for
their bold pyramidal forms. Our road turned up the northern of these glens, and
wound along its side for some distance, almost at a level, until a huge
snow-drift, which rose in a wall across the track, capped with an overhanging
cornice, forced the horses to descend into the bottom of the glen, while we kept
along the line of the intended carriage-road. The snow was just melting off the
turf, and the flowers were exceedingly beautiful. We were pleased to find the
homely cowslips and primroses, mixing with gentians and other alpine plants; but
the newest sight to us was the mass of snowdrops which whitened the ground, in
many places proving their claim to their French name of *perce-neige,* by
pushing their green leaves and clustered blossoms through the still unmelted
snowdrifts.

We saw beneath us a large troop of natives, who had crossed the pass in an
opposite direction, and were making their midday halt. The ridge was now in
view, and over it a bold peak, evidently belonging to the mass designated Adai
Khokh in the Five Verst Map, shot up in the most alarming way through the
clouds. Before beginning the final zigzags the road makes a wide sweep to the
right, to cross the stream flowing from a small glacier which fills up the angle
between the ridges at the head of the glen. The snow had entirely covered all
the excavated track near the top, and had not a path been by this time trodden
out of the steep drift which had accumulated under the actual ridge, our horses
might have had difficulty in getting up.

Owing to the position of the pass, there is little distant view to the west, and
the Rion valley is still hidden; but the head of a glen, containing one of the
sources of the Glola-Squali (one of the feeders of the Rion) was at our feet,
and above it rose the stupendous eastern peak of Adai Khokh, towering above
several neighbouring summits. A very steep and much-crevassed glacier, the
largest we had seen since leaving Kazbek, poured down into the valley, and we
agreed that there was little prospect of any successful climbing in this
direction. A heavy shower soon blotted out the view, The road descended in a
series of very long and gentle zigzags, now obliterated by snow; the winter-fall
had been heavier this year than usual, but it is probable that, should the
carriage-road ever be established, this part of it will have to be roofed over
with galleries, which there would be no difficulty in making with so much wood
close at hand. We jumped across the small stream, and on its opposite bank
passed a well-built house, erected for the accommodation of the officers in
charge of the soldiers who traced the road. I met one of these officers
afterwards, and he descanted eloquently on the hardships he had endured while
living for three months (as he phrased it) on a glacier. The stream tumbled
quickly down into a deep ravine: the road followed it more leisurely, sweeping
over fine pasturages. Suddenly we came to the corner, where the hillsides
trended away to the west, and looked down for the first time on a large portion
of the upper Rion basin, in which term I include the valley of its first
considerable tributary, the Glola-Squali. Few people who have not seen an
absolutely treeless district can appreciate the magical effect of coming out of
one, suddenly, into a densely-forested region. Below us was the head of a deep
valley, the slopes covered with birch and ash, mingled lower down with noble
pines, the dark green of which came out in strong contrast to the lighter
foliage. Spur behind spur, ridge behind ridge, carried the eyes up to a cluster
of finely-shaped peaks on the southern side of the river, which, like the Ardon,
is enclosed by mountain-ranges, and finds an outlet through a narrow gorge. We
stood for some time in delighted surprise, and agreed that we had never seen a
landscape more beautiful, lit up as it was by the afternoon sun, which had burst
through the clouds, and was shining with that special brilliancy so common in
the interval between heavy storms. We soon found ourselves among the trees.
Scattered birches first hung their graceful branches over the path; the
mountain-ash next appeared, accompanied by many varieties of flowering shrubs,
and by flowers (such as campanulas and wild roses) the presence of which
betokened a more genial soil and climate,

From its position on the map we had counted on Gurschavi as a desirable
resting-place, and when the hamlet came in sight, its lovely position determined
us at once to make it, if possible, our headquarters for a day or two. A dozen
wooden cottages, more resembling an untidy Swiss village than the stone
fortresses of the Ossetes, were perched on the edge of a triangular meadow
projecting from the base of the mountain. No less than three glens opened up
behind it, all more or less tempting to an explorer, and in front the position
commanded a wide view of the basin of the Rion and the peaks on its southern
side. The main chain was hidden by the intervening buttresses. The road makes an
immense zigzag down the valley to reach the bottom of the ravine under the
village; but after running down a short cut, and climbing some 200 feet on the
other side, we found ourselves close to the houses, which are surrounded by a
remarkably fine plantation of stinging-nettles. There was no one loitering
outside, so we put our heads into the nearest cottage, and found a large low
room with a few benches and stools, which opened into another with a fireplace
in the centre, occupied by two old women, to whom Paul addressed himself. At
first there seemed likely to be some difficulty, as Caucasian etiquette
prevented our lodging in the same house as the beauties before us; but we had
spied out a very unexpected luxury, in some joints of beef hanging up to one of
the rafters, and were quite determined not to be put off. Opposite the cottage
was a well-built barn; on this we set our eyes as a likely resting-place, and
made our way into it. A heap of hay filled one corner, and the place looked
quite habitable, although somewhat gloomy from the want of a window. More
natives soon turned up, and, finding we should be contented with the
accommodation of the barn, they set to work with a will to make the place as
comfortable as possible. One swept it out, another fetched a bench, and Paul
found everybody willing to aid him in his culinary operations. While he prepared
a steak, we sent Francois to cut some young nettles, which, when chopped up and
boiled, make an excellent vegetable, scarcely distinguishable from spinach. The
hamlet was a small one, and during all the time of our stay there we saw
scarcely more than twenty people. They were not dressed in the showy style of
the Ossetes; their clothes were old and sometimes ragged, and their
cartridge-pouches made of horn and wood, while their belts were of plain
leather, and the daggers hung from them in sheaths equally unornamented. The
❛swell❜ of the place seemed to be a lad of 14, a round-faced fellow, just like
an English schoolboy, who wore a wonderful wideawake hat, with a broad brim
swelling out into a circular crown, divided by braid, and shaped like an orange.
He took a great interest in us and our doings, and ❛fagged❜ several ❛lower
boys,❜ whom he kept in great subjection, to fetch us anything he thought we
should want, In return we amused him by displaying our knives, field-glasses,
and other knick-knacks, so that I believe our visit was a great source of
enjoyment and enlightenment to him. To us it was a great relief to get among a
colony of simple peasants, and to be freed from the numerous restraints of
travelling among the ❛gentlemen❜ of Ossetia. We passed a very comfortable night,
though my mind was a good deal disturbed by discovering the loss of my revolver,
which I now remembered I had unfastened, and must have left behind, near the
house at the foot of the Mamisson Pass. We determined that, if the weather was
fine, Moore and Francois should go the next day on an exploring expedition up to
the foot of the chain, while Tucker and I (both having rubbed heels) should stop
at home, and see to the preparation of an extraordinary banquet.

*July 7th* — The morning was not very promising, but Moore and Francois set out,
in the hope that the weather would clear up. However, it came on to rain
heavily, and we stay-at-homes, rather congratulating ourselves on our superior
position, settled down very contentedly to write up letters and read Shakspeare,
a Globe edition of whose works formed the bulk of our travelling library. Our
companions did not return till late in the afternoon, bringing with them my
revolver, but without having gained much additional information about the
mountains. They had taken shelter, during the worst of the storm, in the house
before mentioned, and then climbed the ridge, between two of the sources of the
Glola-Squali, to a height of about 11,000 feet. The ground was covered with snow
of the most extraordinary pink or rather brickred hue, a phenomenon we noticed
frequently. It is of very rare occurrence in the Alps, and when seen there, the
pink tinge is not generally so vivid. Clouds had hidden everything except the
tail of a glacier on their left, so that we could form no definite plans, and
had nothing to do but to wait till the weather cleared.

*July 8th,* — The rain was over when we awoke, and the bright morning sunshine
poured down upon the rich basin below us, and brought out fresh beauties of
colour and distance in its wooded slopes. The peaks overhead stood out boldly
against the blue sky, and everything looked fresh and inviting. It was
manifestly a day for a view. Our chief object was to inspect the southern face
of the Adai Khokh group, and to ascertain if there was a reasonable prospect of
effecting any high passes or ascents in it. The best way to go seemed to be up
the hillside behind Gurschavi, as we knew that we must soon gain a sufficient
height to see the great chain over the grassy buttresses which now hid it from
us. At the back of the cottages is a burial-ground, marked by some tall
tombstones, where the ❛rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep❜ under the shade of
fine trees. We kept along the edge of the little plateau on which Gurschavi
stands, until we came to a bridge over a stream flowing out of a recess in the
south-eastern angle of the ranges which enclose this end of the Rion basin. The
scale of the scenery, the richness of the vegetation, but, above all, the ruddy
colouring of a set of rock-teeth which sprang suddenly out of the slopes on the
eastern bank, reminded me strongly of several similar scenes amongst the
Dolomites of the Italian Tyrol. A woodman’s path ran alone beside the torrent,
but, as it did not gain height rapidly enough for us, we turned straight up the
slopes. For about 1,000 feet we scrambled up amongst the beautiful forest-trees,
growing with a luxuriance and variety unequalled in the Alps. The underwood was
so dense that we had often difficulty in pushing our way up through it, and were
glad to help ourselves up by the tough branches of the white rhododendrons,
which grew in great quantities, and were now in full blossom. Through the
tree-tops snowy peaks were seen from time to time, and when we found a bank
where no branches intercepted the panorama of the main chain, now full in view
opposite to us, we thought it better to halt and make our observations, rather
than to push further up the hillside. The chain was not cloudless, but thanks to
a strong wind, which was blowing in the upper region, we got a view, at one
moment or another, of every section of it, although the whole was never quite
clear at the same time. The first and most striking of all the summits before us
occupied the position assigned on the Five Verst Map to the peak of Adai
Khokh.^[^0800]^ Three long ribs of rock and ice ran up into a sharp point, and
created one of the most striking mountain-forms I ever saw. The rocks on the
left-hand or north-west rib, seen though a telescope, were of the most
formidable character, some of them appearing actually to overhang; and the other
sides of the mountain were so sheeted with ice as to be, if not absolutely
inaccessible (a word which had, perhaps, best be banished nowadays from a
mountaineer’s dictionary), practically so for our party. Separated by a deep gap
from its slenderer neighbour rose a double-headed mass, supported by huge and
fantastically-broken buttresses of rock. Huge séracs hung in a curtain under its
crest, and raked the lower snow-slopes. These two summits are probably nearer
16,000 than 15,000 feet; to the west of them the chain sinks considerably, and a
succession of snowy eminences, none of them sufficiently marked to arrest the
attention, are connected by icy ridges, steep and high enough to present a
serious obstacle to anyone wishing to make a pass, and discover what lies beyond
and behind them. Masses of rock abutting on the main ridge divided the basins of
sundry small glaciers which filled the hollows at its foot. On the left, the
isolated snowy tower of Tau Burdisula formed a striking termination to the
group.

We were completely puzzled to know what use to make of the knowledge we had now
gained of the neighbouring mountains. The first point settled was, that the two
big peaks must be let alone, and we inclined to a suggestion made by Moore, that
we should cross over to the northern side, and back, by two glacier-passes. The
Five Verst Map showed, on the west side of Tau Burdisula, a pass called Per
Gurdzieveesk, leading from Chiora to the valley of the Uruch. We thought we
detected o weak point in the mountain-wall before mentioned east of Tau
Burdisula, from which, if it should prove accessible from the northern side, we
could be sure of effecting a descent into the Rion valley. It was finally
decided that we should return quickly to Gurschavi, collect our baggage, and go
down to Glola to sleep. From there to Chiora must, we knew, be an easy day, and
from that village, if the weather continued fine, we could cross the known pass
to the Uruch. Its track on the north side was shown by the map as running along
the side of a large glacier, the head of which must be behind the gap in the
ridge we had already observed, as likely to give a passage to the south side.
This scheme had the advantage of leaving us the alternative, in case of bad
weather, or any other hindrance to its execution, of returning over the same
pass we had crossed by, and regaining our base. The decision once made was
promptly acted on, and we raced down through the wood to the village. Our Teeb
horsemen, whom we still had with us, soon got the animals ready, and our goods
packed on their backs. Before we left, a sickly-looking man, who was suffering,
as far as we could judge, from consumption, was brought to us to be cured. Of
course we could do nothing really for the poor fellow, but, willing to give him
satisfaction, as well as to keep up our own credit, we unlocked our little
medicine-case, and poured him out a dose of chlorodyne. The dram was carefully
drained, and as soon as the patient felt its warmth, he gratefully rubbed his
stomach, and, pouring a few drops of water into the cup, he drank them off, in
the hopes of catching any lingering flavour. Our farewell to the boy-prince and
the rest of the village was most cordial, and the payment we offered was this
time accepted, with real demonstrations of surprise and pleasure at its amount.
Amidst universal hand-shaking, and expressions of hopes that we should come
again another year, we made our way out of the village, our regret at leaving
which was only tempered by Paul’s announcement that we had eaten up all the
beef. The prince and a friend accompanied us down to the road, where they took a
final leave, and we saw no more of the jolliest boy in the Caucasus. The road
down the valley keeps on the left bank of the river, and has to make long
circuits round the ravines which furrow the lower slopes, above which sharp
snow-streaked summits^[^0801]^ peered from time to time between the trees. The torrent
falls very rapidly; the road descends more gently through the most magnificent
pineforest, varied with birch, poplar, and elm, and carpeted with moss and a
variety of subalpine flowers. Before reaching the point where the largest
tributary of the Glola-Squali flows out of a glen running deep into the heart of
the main chain, road and river are again on a level. The afternoon was
beautiful, and we enjoyed a superb view of the two peaks of Adai Khokh, which
exactly fill the opening. The right-hand ridge of the eastern peak, seen from
here, is a most exquisitely sharp and thin snow aréte, and its sides are of a
steepness appalling to anyone who has ever allowed the idea of climbing them to
enter his head.

:::: { .wrap-80 .caption }
![Adai Khokh from the Rion Valley.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0237.jpg "Adai Khokh from the Rion Valley."){#b237}
::::

An artist might sit down at this spot within ten yards of the road, and paint a
perfect picture, without putting in a foreground, or in any way improving on
nature. The foaming torrent, and the rich foliage near at hand, the wooded
slopes in the middle distance, and the gigantic mountainforms which close and
crown the view, are worthy of a master-hand, and the rough outline sketch, which
was all we could carry away with us, can give but a faint idea of the scene.
Every bend in the road opened some fresh vista of wood, water, and snow. The
floor of the valley had now widened, and the forest soon gave way to hayfields,
in which parties of women and girls were at work. Having brought on the scene
the far-famed beauties of the Caucasus, this would, I feel, be the place for
romance. Unluckily, like one of our American friends, who, being called on to
admire an Egyptian sunset, declared ❛skyscapes were not in his line,❜
descriptions of female beauty are not in mine, and I have the further plea that
in this instance I should have, not to describe, but to invent. The forms and
faces of the women who left their work to stare at the unprecedented sight of
three English mountaineers, had lost, by exposure to weather and field labour,
any traces of comeliness, and the group, but for certain details of dress, was
just such as might be met with in any Swiss valley.

Before long Glola came into sight on the opposite side of the river, built at
the mouth of a tributary stream^[^0802]^ which had its source in a glacier of the main
chain, a portion of which was for a few minutes visible, and with which we were
destined in a few days to become better acquainted. The bridge above the
village, which existed at the time of Herr Radde’s visit, had gone the way of
all Caucasian bridges; and we had to make a circuit, which cost an extra ten
minutes, to reach its successor, built half a mile lower down the stream, there
flowing in a wide stony bed, and then to return up the opposite bank. Glola is
more like a Swiss village than any we saw before or afterwards; the houses are
all built of wood, and have overhanging eaves, balconies, and roofs laid with
stones, in the fashion of those of the Canton Berne, although without any of
their elaborate carving and general air of finish. The place is sheltered behind
a projecting cliff, and on a brow above it are the ruins of an old castle, which
add considerably to its general effect. We were first led to a cottage, which
had such an indescribable air of griminess and dirt about it, that we altogether
declined to take up our quarters there. We soon settled on an apparently
uninhabited outbuilding, attached to one of the larger houses, where we found a
small room with some hay for our beds, and a broad balcony with a table and
benches, which served us as a sitting-room. Paul had to do his cooking in the
adjoining house, and I believe the presence and interruptions of certain
well-meaning old women put him out; whatever was the cause, we had to wait till
long after dark before we got our dinner. Such incidents seem almost too
trifling to record, but they serve to remind one of what is often lost sight of
afterwards — the difference between travel in a country organised for
pleasure-visitors, and one entirely, so to speak, in a state of nature. We got
our food at last, accompanied by a rare luxury, a bottle of wine. We had not
seen such a thing since leaving Kazbek, and what was now brought us under the
name of wine was a muddy liquor which owed little to the skill of its maker, but
was, at any rate, unadulterated juice of the grape, a recommendation quite
sufficient to Tucker and myself. The people of Glola were of the same type as
those of Gurschavi — homely peasants, who wore the usual style of dress, crowned
by felt hats of various and sometimes intensely comical shapes. We were regaled
with new bread, one of the few delicacies of the country, which we found almost
everywhere. The bread of the Caucasus is peculiar, and would be considered
detestable by many people, but I must own to giving it a decided preference over
the sour black loaves of the German Alps. The peasants never think of baking
until they actually want food; sufficient for the day, or rather for the meal,
is provided, and when more is wanted it has to be made afresh. The general shape
of the loaves is round and flat, and a hungry man can eat two or three of the
ordinary size at a meal. Some, however, are of a more substantial nature, and
have a layer of melted cheese inside them, and these, when hot, are by no means
despicable. Most of the varieties of cakes are made of barley, and are brown in
colour, very close, and more or less heavy; they vary, of course, according to
the quality of the flour used, and the skill of the maker. Here we found another
kind, made of indian-corn, pleasant to the eye and palate, but very difficult of
digestion.

*July 9th.* — The night destroyed an illusion which for a full week we had
cherished most fondly. Hitherto we had been entirely exempt from the pest of
insects, and we laid ourselves down to rest absolutely without suspicion of the
misery in store for us. Tucker, famed for his sufferings in Swiss chalets, was
the first to be attacked; the noise consequent on the pursuit in which he was
engaged aroused me; once awake, to sleep again was impossible, and we all lay
tossing and growling until morning put an end to our tortures.

The day was again fine. The view from Glola down the valley towards the Schoda
chain, was very striking, and in the opposite direction rose the two peaks of
Adai Khokh, grandly defiant as ever. We had no unpleasantness at parting, and
flattered ourselves — alas! how vainly — that our difficulties with uncivil and
extortionate villagers were over, and that henceforth we should be free from
those petty vexations which destroy half the pleasure of travel. Having
recrossed the same bridge, and rejoined the new road, which does not pass
through Glola, we soon again entered the heart of the primeval forest, where the
overhanging arch of foliage entirely shaded us from the sunshine; the
woodcutter's axe seldom thins these glades, for the needs of the scanty
population of the upper valley are small, and the lower district of the Radscha,
between here and Kutais, is so richly wooded that no one has occasion to come
here for timber. The passer-by may see illustrated the whole life of a tree,
from its first stage to the last: the cone just dropped on the ground, the
tender sapling, the forest giant spreading its branches in every direction, and
the trunk, broken and rotten, prostrate on the ground and gradually mouldering
away into the soil, from which a fresh generation will soon spring.

A sharp hour’s walk below Glola brought us to the mouth of the narrow defile
through which the collected waters of the Rion basin make their escape. Three
streams join to form the river just above the gorge: the largest, the true
source of the Rion, comes down the western arm of the valley, from the mountains
behind Gebi; the Glola-Squali, known also by the less euphonious name of the
Dschandschachi-Squali, flows to meet it from the east, and between them a
smaller stream cuts its way directly down from a glacier in the main chain,
through a narrow opening in the lower hills. A bridge crosses the Rion, a short
way below the double confluence, and on a plot of level ground close to the
riverbank stands a house, evidently of Russian construction, but now falling
rapidly into decay. Having made a considerable bend into the mouth of the
defile, and crossed the united streams, we turned up a path which led along the
right bank of the true Rion, through woods as dense as before, although the
single trees were not so fine as those which grow on the opposite slopes. The
path was level for some distance, until it mounted a spur of the Schoda chain,
which nearly barred the valley.

The sunny slopes were converted into meadows and cornfields, and dotted with
dark-brown hay chalets, scarcely a quarter of the size of those in the Alps. A
solitary pine, of great size and perfect shape, marked the top of the ascent,
beyond which we came in sight of Chiora and a stretch of the upper valley, in
which the river, to judge by the width of its stony bed, is accustomed to commit
great ravages, and to change its course very frequently. Arrived opposite the
village, which is prettily situated on a gentle southward-facing slope of
cornfields, we found that there was no bridge where one-half of the stream now
flowed, and we had consequently to wait while our horsemen sought the best ford,
and then to ride, one by one, through the water. It was a long time before we
got the baggage fairly to the other side, and the heat of the sun, reflected
from the stones of the river-bed, made the delay anything but pleasant.

Chiora is built in a totally different style to Glola and Gurschavi. The houses
are all of stone, two-storied, with sloping roofs, scarcely any eaves, and very
small holes for windows. On our arrival, we were conducted to a shed, open on
one side to the air, where we were requested to wait till quarters were prepared
for us. In the meanwhile the whole village gathered round to stare at, and no
doubt criticise, the extraordinary beings who had come to visit them. Paul went
off to survey our intended lodging, and came back very disconsolate, for first
appearances certainly were not cheerful. The interior of all the houses seemed
the same — a couple of ill-lighted rooms with rough stone walls, with wooden
pegs stuck into their crevices, from which hung clothes, sheepskin cloaks, and
various household and field implements. It was too dark inside either to write
or read, so we removed our mattrass to a rough wooden balcony projecting from
the front of the house, whence there was a beautiful view down the valley,
closed by the dark forests opposite Glola, and the serrated summits of the
Wallatschibis Mta. A very sharp rockpeak, rising over the southern slopes
immediately opposite the village, is in shape an almost exact model of the
Rothorn from Zermatt; we saw afterwards that it is an impostor, being in fact
only the end of a long and narrow ridge running towards the valley from one of
the chief summits of the range between Gebi and Oni.

In order to put into execution, as soon as possible, the plan formed on the
rhododendron slope above Gurschavi, of effecting two passes across the main
chain, we made enquiries among the villagers as to the Gurdzieveesk Pass, which
proved well known to them: at first they asserted it took two days to reach the
other side of the mountain, hut on being pressed, they admitted that a good
walker might do it in one. Our only difficulty was in settling the terms on
which a peasant would accompany us to the snow-level on the southern side, and
in making up our minds what instructions to give Paul, whom we meant to leave in
charge of our baggage. Both questions were settled before nightfall; a native
agreed to be ready to start with us at half-past 1 A.M., and we determined that
Paul should hire a horse and go on to Gebi, which was only an hour’s walk
farther up the valley, there to await our return.

The people of Chiora were less simple and kindly than those of Gurschavi and
Glola; but we had no reason to complain of any inhospitable conduct, beyond the
usual desire to make a good bargain, and get as much as they could out of us.
Their impression of our position was shown by a request, made to us in the
course of the evening, that on our return to Kutais, we would represent to the
Governor of Mingrelia the unfair distribution of the mountain pasturages, by
which the neighbouring villages got more than their shave, and Chiora had not
enough for its flocks and herds. According to Paul, we were generally believed
to be officials employed on some survey, or such-like mystery of civilisation,
the existence of which was known to, though its benefit was beyond the
comprehension of, the common Caucasian intellect.

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0800]: [Tuilsas Mta of Herr Radde. Caucasian nomenclature is at present in a state of hopeless confusion. It has seemed to me best to follow in most cases the authority of the Five Verst Map, which the traveller will probably have in his hand. Herr Radde, who frequently differs from it, has not as yet published the result of his researches in the form of a corrected map of the Central Caucasus. I have avoided, as far as possible, encumbering my pages with such unpronounceable names as Sagebigora, Chrowlioto. Sarziwisdsiris Mta, Sopehitigoram Mta. All of these peaks look down an the sources of the Rion.]{.footnote}

[^0801]: [The Wallatschibis Mta of Herr Radde: the names Dolomis-Zaweri and Goeske appear on the Five Verst Map.]{.footnote}

[^0802]: [The Schurulu Squali of Radde.]{.footnote}
