# CHAPTER IX.<br /><small> THE GLACIERS AND FORESTS OF THE CENTRAL CAUCACUS. </small>{#nine .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Caucasian Shepherds — A Lovely Alp — Sheep on the Glacier — A New Pass — A Snow
Wall — A Rough Glen — The Karagam Glacier — Bivouac in the Forest — An Icefall
— A Struggle and a Victory — The Upper Snowfields — The Watershed at last —
Check — A Useful Gully — An Uneasy Night — Glola again — Pantomime — Gebi —
Curious Villagers — A Bargain for Porters — Azalea Thickets — The Source of the
Rion — Rank Herbage — Camp  on the Zeunes-Squali — A  Low Pass — Swamps and
Jungles — Path-finding — The Glen of the Scena — Wide Pasturages — The Naksagar
Pass.<br /><br />
::::


*July 10th.* — We made a late supper, or early breakfast, soon after midnight,
and having insisted on the peasant who was to accompany us sleeping in the same
house, found no difficulty in starting at the hour appointed. Before separating
from Paul, we told him to explain fully to our guide the part we expected him to
perform, and the pay we should give him if he fulfilled it to our satisfaction.
This was a necessary precaution, as we had no means, except signs, of
communicating with our companion, who only knew the Georgian dialect commonly
spoken on the south side of the chain, We climbed the hillside immediately
behind Chiora, soon leaving below us the cultivated fields, and finding
ourselves on grass-covered slopes, adorned with clusters of trees in the manner
of an English park. Shepherds’ fires shone here and there through the darkness,
and our guide took us round in order to pass near some of his friends, who were
camping-out with their flocks. The peasants of the Caucasus do not take nearly
so much pains as those of the Alps to provide themselves with a substantial
shelter while spending the summer on the mountains. It is only rarely, and in
certain districts, that huts at all resembling the Swiss chalets are met with. I
only recall three instances — two in the Uruch valley, and one close to the
source of the Rion. In general the herdsmen are contented with a slight shelter,
constructed of a few boughs and a sheepskin, which can afford very little
protection in bad weather. Close at hand a forked stake is driven into the
ground, on which, if the owner is at home, he hangs his gun. This and a
milking-pail constitute nearly all the furniture of a Caucasian shepherd, who,
as the flock under his charge consists mostly of sheep, oxen, and horses, is
spared the delicate and complicated cares of a large dairy establishment.

Having passed the last of the shepherds’ bivouacs, we steadily followed the
somewhat steep zigzags of the sledge-path, until it surmounted a brow which had
previously cut short our view. Dawn had not yet broken, and the graceful forms
of scattered copses of birch and fir formed a fairylike foreground to a long
moonlight vista up the Tchosura to the glaciers and snowcapped summits of the
main chain. Deep below, in the dark shadow of the valley, the white towers of
Gebi were distinguishable, and behind us the bold peaks of the Schoda chain
stood out against a sky paling with the first approach of daybreak. A herd of
horses, disturbed by our early movements, trotted off across the hillside, which
now became more open.

The path still mounted, and soon even the birch, the tree always found nearest
the snow in these regions, was left behind. A host of alpine flowers, amongst
which the white rhododendron was again conspicuous, covered the ground, only
just free from snow, which still lay in deep drifts in the hollows. The path for
a long time followed a ridge, narrow at first, but gradually broadening into
grassy undulations; on one side the ground broke away suddenly towards the Rion,
on the other it sank more gradually into a barren recess, a branch of the
Tchosura valley, above which rose a steep-sided range covered with small
glaciers. The height of 8,500 feet we had already gained was sufficient to give
us a good panorama of the Upper Rion basin, which served to confirm our previous
estimate of its beauty. The ridge we were walking along now bent round to the
northward, and separated the water flowing down into the Rion at Gebi from the
upper basin of the stream, which joins the river close to its meeting with the
Glola-Squali. Far below us, on our right, we looked down into a deep wooded
defile, the outlet through which this stream escapes, Here the track began to
descend, but first made a long sweep round the hillside, before finally plunging
into the beautifully-timbered little plain, at the mouth of the narrow glen
which leads up, due north, to the Gurdzieveesk Pass.

Knowing that this, the chief part of the day’s walk, was still before us, we
grudged bitterly the 2,000 feet of height thus lost, and, having now been five
hours on the march, determined to stop, and open our provision-wallet. The
beauty of the spot, and a spring bubbling up under a clump of alders, formed
additional inducements to a halt. The level meadow in which we were sitting was
partially covered with trees; the glades were filled with lush herbage, and
bright with many flowering plants. Grassy ridges, rising above the level of the
forest, but not reaching that of perpetual snow, shut oft this sequestered nook
from the lower valley, and immediately overhead, on the east of the narrow
trench, which offered a way up to the crest of the mountains, the steep snowy
sides and tower-like summit of Tau Burdisula caught the eye. The glen up which
our path lay was soon terminated, by a steep glacier falling over in a long
icefall from the unseen snowfields above. The rich pasturages of this beautiful
plain, and the surrounding slopes, are not allowed altogether to run to waste;
we passed herds both of horses and oxen, and saw smoke rising from the bivouacs
of the peasants in charge of thew. Steep walls of rock hem in the upper portion
of the glen and the glacier-torrent has covered the space between them with
granitic boulders, amongst which we picked our way.

A long and gradual ascent to the foot of the glacier was followed by a very
steep but easy climb up the slopes of snow and rock on its right. Halfway up we
stopped, and while resting saw to our surprise a large flock of sheep,
accompanied by their dogs and shepherds, descending towards us. The animals
hurried and slid down the snow at a great pace, apparently anxious to finish
their march, and reach the tempting herbage, already in sight below them. The
dogs were fine animals, but somewhat savage, and not at all disposed to
acquiesce quietly in our presence they were called off by their masters, with
whom we were, of course, unable to hold any communication. Our Chiora peasant
now expressed by signs his wish to return, so, having given him a good day’s
walk, we paid him all he asked for, and let him go.

For some distance further the ascent was very rapid, still over alternate beds
of shale and snow. At last we were on a level with the top of the icefall, and
looked into the deep névé-filled basin which feeds it. We had not carefully
followed the sheep-track, and on looking back saw that it had turned sharp up
the slopes to the left, some distance behind. Although it would have been
perfectly easy to regain it, the course up the glacier to its head was so far
the most obvious that we adopted it without much thought. The upper snowfield
was more extensive than it looked from below, and rose in a succession of gentle
steps, each more or less broken by large crevasses. These, with the safeguard of
the rope, we found no difficulty in turning, and came at last in sight of the
point at which we should hit the ridge — a well-marked and striking gap between
two rocks at the extreme head of the snowy basin. The glacier scenery was wild,
but not particularly grand; the summits around us, which cut of the all distant
view, were, with the exception of Tau Burdisula, of no great height, and even
that did not look very imposing from this side. The trudge over the last
snowfield was heavy, and we began to count the number of steps, and to wonder
how many more would be necessary to get over what seemed to the eye a very small
distance. When (at 12.50) we reached the gap, and found shelter under some rocks
from the cold blast which was blowing through it, we congratulated ourselves on
having perpetrated that delight of Alpine climbers, a new col, though whether
our notch would prove one was still a question. A snow couloir fell away rapidly
for some hundred feet between splintered towers of rock, and then, the angle
becoming still steeper, was lost to sight, and the eye descended to a tolerably
level and smooth glacier backed by an icy ridge, equal in height to that on
which we were sitting. Up the glacier a long procession of sheep was slowly
wending its way towards the regular pass, in the track of those we had
encountered in the morning. The northern side, although easy to a mountaineer,
seemed to be defended by a crevasse large enough to form a serious obstacle to
sheep and dogs. The bold rock-shapes in the foreground, and the wildness of the
whole view, entirely confined to the snow-region, and devoid of any touch of
softness, reminded us of those Alpine subjects with which all who are acquainted
with Mr. Walton’s drawings must be familiar.

Before attempting the doubtful descent we ❛jödeled❜ and fired off our revolvers,
to attract the attention of the shepherds, who halted for some minutes to watch
us. Even a common snow-slope — and this was by no means a common one — looks
remarkably like a wall when seen from any point nearly opposite it: I fancy,
therefore, that our performance during the next half-hour must have been fully
as exciting and gratifying to the spectators as those of Blondin and Leotard are
to a London crowd. Fortunately, the snow was in perfect order, firm enough to
hold without being too hard to dig steps into with the foot, and with ordinary
care there was little risk in the descent on to the glacier, notwithstanding the
really formidable angle of the slope, which was equal to that of the last piece
of the Wetterhorn, hut about 2,000, instead of 700, feet in height. Francois
took exactly the right course, and by swerving to the left, about halfway down,
avoided an overhanging mass of sérac, which would have brought us to a sudden
check. Once on the level of the glacier, we had nothing to do but to follow its
course, which led us in a north-casterly direction. The ice being covered with a
tolerably thick Layer of dirty snow, and almost free from crevasses, our
progress was rapid, and we were enabled to make use of the smooth surface to the
point where the glacier terminated, and the stream issuing from it struggled,
with only partial success, to free itself from the snow-beds which still strove
to bury it from the light of day. When we had once got below the snow-limit,
which is comparatively low in this rock-encircled and sunless glen, the walking
became very rough. Huge boulders, fallen from the cliffs above, strewed the
ground, and offered under their sides lairs, evidently often made use of by
shepherds or travellers desirous to cross the glacier while the snow was hard, a
precaution almost essential for people to whom the use of a rope is unknown. We
were too eager to gain a view of the ice-stream, which we knew from the map must
fill the hollow in which the glen at last merges, to take advantage of any of
these bivouacs. Scattered firs made their appearance, relieving the otherwise
desolate character of the scenery, and the Caucasian rhododendron covered the
ground, filling up the crannies between the rocks with its thick branches.

There were now some slight traces of a path, and we came suddenly upon two
peasants (probably natives of Zenaga, the highest village in this branch of the
Uruch valley) and a donkey, the object of whose mountain excursion we were
unable to ascertain owing to our ignorance of the Caucasian dialects. The two
parties having satisfied each other, by a close mutual inspection, that no harm
was intended on either side, separated; the peasants taking a track leading
towards the valley, while we went forward in search of a point which might
overlook the great glacier, and afford some insight into the chances of our
proposed venture on the morrow. An isolated grassy knoll, just in the mouth of
the glen, seemed the spot most likely to offer the view we wanted, and the scene
which burst upon us on reaching it so far exceeded and differed from our
expectations that, at first, we could hardly realise its magnificence. The whole
bed of the valley into which the glen fulls is filled by an immense glacier only
surpassed in the Alps by the Aletsch.^[^0900]^ Its head was hidden behind nearer
buttresses, but we had a good view of the ranges on its right bank.^[^0901]^ Opposite
rose a high and steep mountain-wall; higher up, looking in a south-easterly
direction, an odd tower-shaped rock appeared in front of a long curtain of ice,
surmounted, on the right, by a tall gracefully-shaped peak, and on the left by a
serrated ridge, in which tooth succeeded tooth in the most formidable array.
Following with the eye the course of the ice-stream, to the point where it made
a sudden plunge into a branch of the valley of the Urunch, we looked over the
great waves which marked the commencement of the fall, and saw, beyond and far
below them, a tolerably wide valley. Its slopes were wooded with firs, and we
could distinguish some cultivated land; the northern horizon was formed by
rugged peaks, too low to carry perpetual snow. The summit of one of them bears a
striking resemblance to a castle with a tall turret at one of the angles.

Our position was much the same with regard to our proposed pass as that of a
traveller at the Montanvert intending to cross the Col du Géant. We had
ascertained that the great glacier marked in the map existed, end was in reality
far larger than it was represented; but we could see nothing of its upper
portion, and could only be certain that it poured out of a gap just visible on
the right of the great snow-peaks. These offered us a puzzle, which our united
endeavours failed to solve, as it was impossible to identify them with any of
the summits we had studied from the south, while we found it hard to believe
that such lofty peaks did form part of the watershed. This problem was left to
time to solve, and we came to the conclusion that, though we had gained no
positive information as to the possibility of crossing the chain by the great
glacier, yet appearances were sufficiently encouraging to justify our resolving
to make the attempt. We accordingly set to work to search for a suitable spot
for a bivouac. There were plenty of boulders strewn about, capable of affording
more or less shelter, but there was no water; therefore we reluctantly decided
that we must descend the steep fir-clad bank below us to the side of the stream
flowing from the Gurdzieveesk Pass, which here runs in a narrow channel between
the hillside and the huge lateral moraine of the Karagam glacier. We had not
gone far when Francois, fortunately, hit upon a spring, and as there was a
tolerably level and sheltered spot of ground not far off, we at once settled to
remain there for the night. The first thing to do was to cut a quantity of young
fir-branches, to serve for beds, and to eject sundry small boulders, which
inconveniently contracted our not over-large sleeping-place. We next proceeded
to unpack our provisions, to count over and apportion our store of bread, and to
hunt out certain rare delicacies, which had been specially reserved for some
such occasion as the present. Our dinner was of the most recherché description:
a first course of sardines was followed by chicken, and a box of *paté de foie
gras,* one of two purchased at Tiflis, which, spread not too thickly over slices
of Caucasian loaves, proved a ❛lingering sweetness long drawn out❜ to all of us.

It was very difficult to realise, as we sat and chatted round the log-fire which
Francois had prepared, how far we really were from home, and that our
resting-place was not some old Alpine haunt from which we should cross on the
morrow to Zermatt or Grindelwald. In reality our position was sufficiently
strange, unable as we were to hold any conversation with the people of the
country, and separated from our interpreter and luggage by a long day’s journey
and a great range of mountains, Its discomforts and uncertainties were not,
however, sufficient to counterbalance the pleasure derived from the sense of
novelty and adventure, and the only real subject of anxiety which disquieted us
was the state of Tucker’s heels, both of which he had rubbed raw during the
day’s walk. Moore was fortunately provided with plaister, and the failure of the
natural was supplied by an artificial coating. When daylight faded away we
arranged our side-bags, the only luggage we carried, as pillows, and soon fell
off to sleep.

*July 11th.* — Our sheltered position, combined with the fineness of the weather
and a good fire, which was kept up nearly all night, prevented our suffering
from cold, and I have seldom enjoyed sounder sleep than I did in this bivouac in
the fir-forest. We were, in fact, almost too comfortable, for no one stirred
before daybreak, and it was not till half-past three that our preparations were
concluded, and we were ready to start for the unknown region in which the great
ice-stream flowing under our feet had its origin. We had previously discussed
the question, whether it would be better to descend on to the glacier or to keep
along its left bank, and had decided in favour of the latter course,
notwithstanding the necessity it involved of partially retracing our steps, in
order to cross the stream flowing from the Gurdzieveesk glen. The circuit
necessary to effect this passage cost us an hour’s most toilsome walking. The
place at which we jumped the stream was one not to be generally recommended, as
it was necessary to advance to the point of a smooth and slippery rock, and jump
from thence on to the farther side. The jump itself was easy, but the ❛takeoff ❜
was so bad, and the consequences of a slip into the rapid torrent would have
been so serious, that no small care was necessary. After a tiresome scramble,
amidst rhododendron bushes and over large and frequently loose boulders, we were
heartily glad to meet with a distinct though narrow path leading in the
direction we wished to follow. After mounting for some distance, by steep
zigzags, up a bank broken by crags and covered with underwood, we found
ourselves on a sloping pasturage by the side of the Karagam glacier, the fall of
which towards the valley was here very considerable. In about two hours from our
bivouac we had gained a projecting brow, which had hitherto cut off the view of
the upper glacier. To our surprise, we found here a small stone-built hut and
enclosure, used by the shepherds during the summer months, but not yet
inhabited.

We now saw how the gap on the right of the great snowy peaks was filled, and in
what manner the glacier descended from the upper snowfields. A second and
previously invisible peak appeared further to the west, and through the deep
hollow between it and the summits we had admired on the previous afternoon
poured the main body of the ice-stream, in a frozen cataract of the greatest and
(I speak for myself) most repulsive beauty. So great was the impression made on
my mind by the tangled web of crevasse and sérac, that I expressed some
hesitation as to the prudence of our attempting to force a passage; my doubts,
however, were promptly suppressed by Francois, who gave a very decided opinion
in favour of the practicability of the icefall. The shepherd’s path still
remained faithful, and conducted us easily along the slopes above the glacier,
which are deeply seemed by numerous watercourses. Before reaching the foot of
the icefall, a level space is found between the moraine and the hillside, where
the ground is covered with soft turf, and a little stream has space to dance
along between grassy banks, and to expand itself in places into crystal pools.
The saucy water-nymph played us a sorry practical joke, by tearing Tucker's
drinking-cup out of his hand, and hurrying off with it. The cup was of no value
in itself, but we could ill spare it at the time. Two lateral glaciers coming
from either side join the Karagam immediately below the icefall, but neither of
them is of considerable size. The path, which had hitherto served so well, now
came to an end, where low stone walls built under an overhanging boulder showed
its object, and indicated the occasional visits of shepherds and their flocks to
the grassy slopes which rose above the glacier on our right. We here took leave
of vegetation and *terra firma,* which we were not again to tread until we
reached the valley of the Rion. In crossing the moraine we did not take the best
possible course, and had, in consequence, to walk along the narrow ridge of a
pile of rubbish, which formed quite a typical aréte, and would, if provided with
proper precipices, have been most sensational.

The foot of the icefall was soon reached, and the way in which it could best be
attacked became obvious. The lower portion promised to be tolerably plain
sailing; but it was evident that, after a time, it would be necessary to bear to
the left, on which side alone the upper maze of crevasses appeared at all
assailable. The ice, which was almost level where we first entered on it, soon
began to rise before us, and the surface, although not as yet seamed by any deep
chasms, became uneven and slippery. Having reached the beginning of the real
work, where it was necessary to put on the rope, we took the opportunity of
halting to eat a second breakfast, to which a rivulet, just unloosed by the
returning warmth from its night’s imprisonment, contributed most usefully. A
teetotaller would have a decided advantage over his winebibbing companions in
Caucasian mountaineering; the general impossibility of obtaining drinkable wine
or spirit in any of the upper valleys is a rather serious matter to men taking
hard exercise, and accustomed to some such support.

The real work of the day now began. At first it did not seem likely to prove
very serious, for we found little snowvalleys which led past and round the
towers of broken ice, and enabled us to turn the huge chasms which ran across
the slope to left and right of us. Our prospects of success began, however, to
look very questionable when these chasms became more continuous, and cutting in
half the snowy dells forced us to plunge into the intricate labyrinth of
ice-towers and crevasses, in our endeavour to force a way through the tortuous
mazes of the fall. The difficulties of a broken glacier have been often and well
described by Alpine travellers, and those which we now encountered presented no
particular feature of novelty. They were, however, the most numerous and
complicated of their kind any of us had ever battled with. Once, after
struggling through trenches, up walls, and under towers of blue crystal, fair to
the eye, but liable at any minute to topple over, and therefore to be avoided or
hastily passed by, we came to a great chasm, which at first sight seemed
impassable. Behind us was ❛clean starvation,❜ for our stock of provisions would
not hold out over another day. The only alternative course was to descend to the
village of Zenaga, and try by signs to procure food there, at the risk of being
arrested as suspicious characters, and sent down to give what account of
ourselves we could at the nearest Cossack outpost. Our situation, therefore,
pave us every inducement to persevere, if not at all hazards, at least as far as
prudence would permit.

A snow-bridge, which elsewhere might not have been approved of as fitted for
public use, was, under the circumstances, voted worth trying, and Francois went
ahead, to make such improvement in the footway as the axe could effect. This was
not much, and the deficiencies of the frail structure were too serious to be
supplied by any ingenious contrivances. We had to descend a bank of ice, six
feet high, to reach the level of the snowy crest, fully twenty feet in length,
which, like an arch of Al Sirat, was flung over the icicle-fringed chasms
yawning to unknown depths on either hand. The top of this crest was uneven, and
about the middle of the bridge an accurately measured and delicately-managed jump
was requisite to reach two pigeon-holes, cut by Francois for the feet, on the
further side of an awkward gap. Then each walked carefully for several yards,
like a cat along the top of an old and rotten wall, to the point where, instead
of abutting against the steep snow-bank on the opposite side of the crevasse,
the bridge broke down altogether, making a second and still more awkward jump
necessary. The man in front, having made the leap and anchored himself in the
snow-bank, turned round and grabbed tight hold of the arm of the next — a
desirable precaution, as a little too much impetus might have thrown the jumper
backwards into the chasm. Steps were then cut on to a promontory of ice
separating the big crevasse from a smaller relation, which was not beyond a
straight-forward jump, more formidable in appearance than reality, as the
landing-place was good. We were now in a position to take advantage of a series
of connected ridges, by which we made our way back into one of the snow-filled
depressions we had found useful earlier in the day. For half an hour good
progress was made; then again for half an hour we did little but wander up and
down, seeking some exit from a fresh labyrinth, and almost despairing of final
success. The sérac scenery throughout was of the grandest description, and we
were constantly forced to admire the beauty of our stubborn foes, the
icicle-fringed and blue-caved crevasses, and to wonder at the curious forms and
grouping of the frozen towers and pinnacles.

As time went on we could see, by the diminished proportions of the ridges behind
us, and the change from the clear crystal substance of the lower glacier to the
half-formed ice, or rather ❛névé,❜ of the upper regions, that we were slowly,
but surely, drawing near the top of the fall. We were rashly congratulating
ourselves on having achieved the victory, when a fresh obstacle appeared — a
great split in the surface, with an upper lip ten feet higher than the lower.
Francois made some foothold on the further side with his axe, jumped across, and
attempted to work himself up the face of the perpendicular upper lip, while we
watched his proceedings with some anxiety from an insecure situation on the
lower bank. After several vain endeavours to wriggle or work himself up, he gave
in. It was no easy matter to get back again, but he managed it by a skilful
tumble; then with gloomy forebodings were traced our steps, until, several
hundred yards to the left, where the crevasse was lost in a big hollow, we found
a part of the wall of loose floury snow, up which there was no serious
difficulty in forcing a passage. The steepest part of the icefall was now fairly
below us, but we were still unable to see far ahead, as a line of broken waves
of névé separated us from the unknown land above. Though our course was still
necessarily zigzag, and occasionally subject to an annoying check, the first
chapter of difficulties was overcome. The soft state of the snow, into which we
sank at every step, now seemed likely to prove a less exciting but scarcely less
serious hindrance to our progress. Francois having of late had more than his
share of work, Moore relieved him by taking the lead, and soon enforced his
request that we would keep the rope taut, by sinking up to his shoulders in a
concealed crevasse. Not long after this incident, the slope before us lessened,
and the view of the upper region, to which we had been anxiously looking forward
for so many hours, burst upon us. It was now 1.30 P.M., and we had therefore
spent six hours in fighting our way up the icefall, the height of which, from
the rough measurements possible with ow aneroid, we estimated at but little
under 4,000 feet. The famous ❛séracs❜ of the Col du Géant are child’s-play when
put in comparison with these Caucasian rivals, and I think it very possible that
a party endeavouring to force this passage at a later period of the summer might
meet with a signal repulse.

Our feelings, on viewing the new scene revealed to us, were those of mingled
admiration, astonishment, and perplexity. Like Jack when he had climbed his
beanstalk, we were a good deal taken aback by the strange region in which we
found ourselves, and not a little puzzled what to do next. Before us stretched a
vast reservoir of snow, which soon split into two bays, running respectively
east and south. The eastern branch broke down upon the other in a grand fall of
séracs; its head was surrounded by a number of magnificent rock-peaks, including
amongst them the mass which had presented so imposing an appearance from our
bivouac, not at all dwarfed by nearer approach. The surface of the southern bay
was almost a dead flat, hemmed in by icy ridges, the summits of which scarcely
attained the dignity of separate mountains. The extent of these snowfields was,
to us who had to make our way to the other side of them, almost appalling; how
much of the effect they produced on our minds was owing to the exciting struggle
we had gone through to attain them, it is of course impossible to say. I
suppose, if the first men who saw the upper regions of the Aletsch glacier had
come upon them by the Jungfrau Joch, they would have been likely to exaggerate
their effect. A similar allowance must be made for us. The principal cause of
perplexity was our inability to recognise, in any of the peaks now in sight, the
two summits of Adai Khokh, so conspicuous from the eastern branch of the Rion
basin, and which we had hitherto confidently reckoned on as landmarks. Each had
a different theory, but there was no time to stop and argue it out: so we
agreed, by a majority of voices, to put our trust in the compass, and push up
the southern bay, as that direction must, we believed, ultimately bring us to a
point overlooking the Rion valley.

There are no incidents to relate in a three-hours’ tramp across a soft
snowfield, but such an operation is not to be lightly estimated, because it
occupies but a brief space in the narration. Each in turn took the arduous task
of leading — no slight exertion, when the leader sank at every step nearly up to
his knees. The mountain we had seen from the bivouac now towered grandly in our
rear, its western summit offering a striking resemblance to the Matterhorn from
Breuil. In front the monotonous snow-plain seemed more endless the further we
advanced; on the left hummock after hummock was passed, while on the opposite
side some projecting rocks were for long our goal. They were reached and left
behind, and still there was no change in the sameness of the view, except the
more prominent appearance of a considerable mountain on the right, which now
revealed itself as our old acquaintance, Tau Burdisula, under a new aspect. At
last, about 4 P.M., we reached an almost imperceptible watershed, first
indicated by the appearance of the blue ridges of the far-off Achaltzich
mountains over the neighbouring snows.

For some distance the fall was as slight as the rise had been on the other side;
then the slope suddenly steepened, and we recognised for the first time our
exact position. From our feet a glacier, a small portion of the outflow of the
❛shining tablelands❜ we had been traversing, poured down into the glen, the
torrent of which joins the eastern Rion at Glola. We were, in fact, standing on
the very snows of which we had caught a glimpse when entering that village a few
days before. The natural course was to find a way down this glacier; but after a
few hundred feet of easy descent, it toppled over in a tremendous icefall,
apparently as long as, and a good deal steeper than, the one we had ascended
with so much difficulty. Once entangled in this complicated labyrinth, there
seemed little prospect of getting free of it before dark, even if the passage
proved practicable at all. We took therefore what, although its adoption
disgusted me at the time, was, I believe, the only sensible course, and
deliberately returning to the Col mounted the slopes to the east, and crossed a
snowy head which projected above the top of the icefall.

There was still a moot point to be decided — whether we should endeavour to get
down the mingled rocks and snowslopes on the left of the icefall into the glen
leading directly to Glola, or whether we should bear still more to the east, and
descend into one of the branches of the wide valley which leads up to the base
of Adai Khokh. Whichever course we decided on, it was necessary first to
traverse diagonally a series of steep slopes, overhanging ground above the
glacier, which might for all practical purposes be considered as a precipice.
The surface was soft, and we had no trouble in step-cutting; but the snow more
than once showed a disposition to crack and slide downwards in masses, leaving
bare a substratum of ice, which, to anyone versed in mountaineering craft, was
unpleasantly suggestive. We instinctively held our axes with a firmer grasp, and
congratulated ourselves that there was no weak brother, or lumbering porter,
likely to test the power of a slip in carrying down with a run the whole upper
layer of snow. We were well pleased to reach a rib of rocks, and to clamber down
them for some little distance; and having by this time decided at any rate to
examine the descent into the eastern valley, we made our way over some safer
slopes to the crest of the ridge in that direction.

The fall of the ground on the eastern side was undeniably steep, and an
extremely ugly-looking ❛couloir,❜ opening immediately at our feet, did not offer
a tempting exit. Francois promptly pronounced against this side of the ridge; I
was not satisfied with the grounds of his verdict, and untying the rope
scrambled down a few feet to gain a better view. My investigation was rewarded
by the discovery of a second snow-gully, which ran up and terminated against a
buttress a hundred feet below, and, after falling for some distance in a
direction parallel to the ridge we were on, turned sharply at right-angles and
was lost to sight. As far as could be seen, it offered not only a practicable
but an easy line of descent, which I pointed out to Francois, who suggested the
possibility of the lower portion being precipitous. We agreed, however, that all
the indications went to show this to be extremely unlikely, and that no more
promising way out of our difficulties offered itself.

The view before us had been, during the last hour, one of surpassing beauty;
while we slowly descended a projecting buttress, our position gave us a raking
view of the peaks of the main chain, and we were at the same time at a
sufficient elevation to overlook the whole of the southern sub-Caucasian
district. The Radscha lay at our feet, a labyrinth of green ridges and dark
forest-clad ravines, through the centre of which the Rion finds a devious way to
Kutais and the Mingrelian lowlands. The waters of the river flashed in the
sunshine, and pointed out the deep cleft through which it pusses before reaching
Oni. On the one side rose the imposing mass of the Schoda; on the other was a
cluster of Snowy peaks, remarkable for their elegant pyramidal outlines.
situated to the south-east of Gurschavi, and separating some of the headwaters
of the Ardon and the Rion. Far away in the west a high glacier-crowned chain
arrested the attention; reference to the map showed that it must be the Leila
mountains, which form the southern boundary of Suanetia. The mists, which some
hours earlier had been sufficiently numerous to cause anxiety, had now melted
away, and left the blue sky unclouded. It was a perfect summer’s evening, and
the sloping rays of the sun, already sinking rapidly towards his rest, flooded
and transfigured the wide landscape with a golden glory, which overcame the
indifference to the charms of mature too often brought on by fatigue, and roused
us to make constant appeals to one another to admire some freshly-discovered
beauty.

A very short scramble down the crags brought us to the head of the gully, where
we were delayed by an incident we regarded only as ludicrous at the time, but
which caused us a provoking loss. In stepping off the rocks on to the snow,
Tucker suddenly subsided into a deep hole, the existence of which was concealed
by a thin and treacherous crust. He went down at least ten feet below the
surface, and the chasm was so narrow that considerable exertion was required to
haul him out again. It was not discovered till some time afterwards that an
excellent telescope had been wrenched off his shoulders in the struggle. It was
an illustration of the proverb, ❛Misfortunes never come single,❜ and we could
only console ourselves with the obvious reflection that it was impossible for us
to go on losing a drinking-cup and telescope every day. The snow in the upper
part of the gully was rather hard; but by keeping close to the side, and digging
steps with our heels, we got along capitally, and soon reached the corner,
whence we saw a straight unbroken trough leading down to the base of the cliffs,
and on to a snowfield which stretched down to green pasturages. We felt, for the
first time, that the fight was over, and the victory won, in so far that we were
secure of sleeping below the forest level on the southern side of the chain, of
which there had been, up to this moment, considerable doubt, We were as pleased
at the prospect of a bivouac on the turf, in the place of a night spent in
kicking our heels against frozen rocks, or, worse still, in the bosom of a
crevasse, as an Alpine traveller is at unexpectedly discovering a good hotel
where he only looked for a poor chalet. We slid merrily down the snow-gully, in
the track of a gigantic snowball which was now reposing at the bottom. Having
observed from above, that by traversing the slopes to the right, we should,
without the need of any further ascent, cross a low ridge dividing two hollows,
and enter the one most likely to lead directly towards the valley, we heroically
withstood our disposition to go straight down to the grass, and kept for some
time at a level, at the cost of half-an-hour’s rather tiresome walking.

At last the head of the hollow, still covered with fastmelting snow, was
reached; here, as in many other places, the red colour of the surface attracted
our notice. Where the snow no longer lay, its meltings made the turf a perfect
playground for watercourses, through which we splashed on, anxious to gain the
forest before nightfall, The first sign of life was a troop of horses; a little
lower a distinct path appeared, which we gladly accepted as our guide until it
brought us to a brow some height above the stream, and then turned away down a
slope to the left. It was already growing dusk, and we had just entered the
highest copse of birches; water was, of course, a necessary adjunct to our
halting-place, and hesitating to leave the stream, still close at hand, we
determined to go down through the copse and sleep at its foot, beside the water.
The chief objection to our camping-ground proved to be the absence of even a
square foot of level soil. After treading down the long grass, it was necessary
to break off branches and lay them on the lower side of the spot selected by
each for his bed, to prevent the sleeper rolling away down the slope. Having
lighted a fire, we ransacked our bags, laid together what little provision there
was left, and set aside one roll for the morning; the next thing was to divide
the vest into portions; each man got a slice of bread about two inches square,
and half the limb of a chicken. After this frugal supper had been disposed of,
we covered ourselves as far as possible with our mackintoshes, and lay down to
court sleep, but we had not long dozed off, when several big drops of rain
effectually roused us. A thunder-shower had blown up, and the dark clouds which
obscured the moon held out very unpleasant threats of a ducking. Luckily, they
passed off without any serious fall of rain, and having exchanged mutual
grumbles, we again drew up our mackintoshes over our faces, and relapsed into
uneasy slumbers, or reflections on the work done and the sights seen during the
past two days.

The object of our double passage of the mountains had been to discover what lay
behind the great snowy wall which bounds every northward view from the Upper
Rion, and to learn something of the breadth and character of this portion of the
Caucasian watershed. The result of our expedition was satisfactory, for it
enabled us to form a tolerably correct idea of the general character of the
chain westwards from the Mamisson Pass to the sources of the Rion. Tau Burdisula
may be taken as a point of division; from it to the Koschtantau group, the
central ridge is too narrow to support any vast snowfields or firstclass
glaciers, while to the east of it the chain branches into a network of ridges,
the spaces between which are filled by vast névé-reservoirs, of which the
Karagam glacier is only one of the outlets. No attempt to distinguish these
ridges, or to name the numerous peaks which rise out of them, has been made by
the authors of the Five Verst Map; but the portion of the chain between Tau
Burdisula and the Mamisson Pass, from the number and height of its summits and
the size of its glaciers, forms undoubtedly one of the most remarkable
mountain-groups of the Caucasus.

*July 12th.* — Our quarters were not so luxurious that we cared to remain in
them longer than necessary, and we rose at daybreak. Our breakfast was workhouse
fave, stale bread and water, and very little of the former. It did not take long
to dispose of, and we were glad to set out and shake off, by a brisk walk down
to the valley, the chill and stiffness produced by our night’s lodging and
previous hard work, We soon lost sight of the track of the previous evening, and
ran down the steep and, at first, only partially-wooded slopes in search of
another. Before very long we lighted on a broad path, which, after skirting the
hillside for some little distance, descended by a succession of steep zigzags to
the stream, which, rising in the glaciers of Adai Khokh, joins the Glola-Squali
between Gurschavi and Glola. When we got fairly into the forest, the variety of
the foliage and the beauty of the wild flowers gave us a constant interest.
Dwarf honeysuckles, eampanulas, and wistarias were abundant, and the
tiger-lilies shot up in clusters, each spike bearing from two to seven blossoms.
Near the stream the sombre foliage of the pines added, by contrast, to the
effect of the deciduous forest. Shortly before crossing the Glola-Squali to the
Mamisson road, we met a party of peasants apparently going to look after their
flocks, and armed, as usual, with daggers.

We arrived at Glola in four hours from our bivouac, and going at once to the
house where we had before found lodging, attempted, by the aid of a few Russian
words and a great deal of pantomime, to explain our wants to the people.
Necessity is a wonderful sharpener of the wits, and we all got on famously by
the language of signs; but there was no question as to who was the leading
pantomimist of the company, and we thought Moore perfect in his grand
performances of milking the cow and mimicking a hen’s cackle, in order to
procure us milk and eggs, until our friend surpassed himself by ❛riding a
cockhorse❜ on an ice-axe, and prancing about, in order to intimate our wish for
horses to carry us to Gebi. Pantomime, on the part of the villagers, explained
that the horses were all on the mountain, but should be fetched. We waited for
them so long that after we had finished our meal, Moore and I lost patience and
walked off, leaving Francois with Tucker, whose heels, although they had carried
him pretty well across the pass, were still in a tender condition. When the
horses came at last, the mistress of the horse presented Tucker with two loaves,
made of a better quality of flour than the common bread, and sent her son in
charge of the animals.

The day was fine, and the heat in the valley was great. We retraced our
footsteps of the previous Thursday until opposite Chiora, wheve, instead of
fording the river, we kept along the path which continues to follow its right
bank. The valley, although of considerable width, is almost entirely filled by
the stony bed of the Rion, and the path, forced to wind over the spurs of the
southern range, is in consequence very uneven. After turning the base of a
projecting and densely-wooded ridge, about halfway between Chiora and Gebi, the
valley ceases to be entirely devastated by the torrent, and the path becomes
level. It is shaded by thickets of alders and hazel, the stems of which were
girt round by wild hops. Before reaching Gebi, four streams, issuing from as
many lateral glens of the Schoda chain, had to be crossed — a matter of some
difficulty,as the popular idea of a bridge on the Rion valley seems to be a thin
and rough branch laid from bank to bank, to traverse which successfully requires
some training in the customs of the country. The glimpses of luxuriant foliage
and snowy peaks up these side-glens more than repaid us for the trouble we
experienced with their torrents. The last and largest, the Latkischora, which
falls in nearly opposite Gebi, has a wide and stony bed, aud a considerable
volume of water. The Rion itself is crossed by a wooden bridge before entering
the village, which stands most picturesquely on a steep-sided promontory on the
left bank of the river, and just above its junction with the Techosura, the
stream flowing out of the valley we had looked down into from the slopes above
Chiora.

Gebi, unlike the other villages of the Rion valley, is provided with towers of
defence similar to those which are universal in Suanetia. These towers are built
of large unevenlyshaped blocks of stone, and the walls contract towards the top,
which is covered with a sloping roof of wood or slate, like that often put on an
unfinished church-tower at home. They add much to the picturesque effect of the
place, which, from a distance, looks like a large feudal castle. Some of the
houses are built in a knot, as closely as possible together; others are
scattered round an open space like a village-green. In the centre of this we
observed a small wooden building, round which was gathered a crowd of idlers; we
rightly surmised that Paul had taken up his quarters there, and was now the
centre of attraction. He was of course delighted to see us, having spent three
rather melancholy days, surrounded by the inquisitive and troublesome villagers;
no difficulties however had arisen, and the lodge which had been assigned to him
was far more comfortable than we had any right to expect. It consisted of two
rooms and a balcony; in the outer apartment there was a bench and a fireplace;
the inner we constituted our bedroom. We never entirely satisfied ourselves as
to the use to which the building was commonly put, but, as far as we could
understand the explanation given through Paul by the villagers, it was designed
as a kind of court-house, where the elders might meet, and any public business
be transacted.

A tall fine-looking peasant, the headman of the place, came formally to bid us
welcome, and to assure us that all our wants should be supplied. A high
sheepskin hat distinguished him from the general crowd, numbering at least 150
men and boys, who, attracted by our arrival, had formed a circle outside the
door to watch our proceedings. There was even a greater variety of head-gear
amongst the peasants of Gebi than in the bazaar of Kutais. Some carried the
❛baschlik❜ with the hood over the head, and the point turned upwards like a
fool’s-cap; a few wore the small Mingrelian bonnet, almost invisible in the
middle of their heavy shocks of hair; the greater number had soft felt
wideawakes — a bell-shape was perhaps the most fashionable, but no two could be
found exactly alike. Even the boys were armed with daggers, and many of the men
carried their guns in sheepskin cases across their backs; their clothes were for
the most part soiled and ragged. Though not, on the whole, a fine-looking race,
like the Ossetes, they did not bear in their faces any peculiarly vicious
expression, beyond an air of lazy stupidity. One or two of the men wore Russian
medals, showing their complete and voluntary acknowledgment of the Government.
We found, invariably, that in proportion as the natives are brought into contact
with their rulers, they improve in manners and civilisation, and that the
districts which the Russians have left to take care of themselves are those in
which the old customs of petty warfare, robbery, and murder still prevail.

Our dress, our accoutrements, and our luggage proved inexhaustible sources of
amusement to the large circle of which we were constantly the centre. What
caused the greatest excitement was the sight of our pocket-handkerchiefs, and
our manner of using them. Upon the first occasion of blowing our noses, a roar
of admiration burst forth, and afterwards the slightest sign of a repetition of
the performance sufficed to raise a murmur of excitement amongst the expectant
crowd.

We had always intended to halt at least a day at Gebi, and if possible to make
it our headquarters for some excursions amongst the mountains round the sources
of the Rion, where in most maps the name of Pass-Mta (said to be derived from
Phasis-Mta?) is printed across the main chain, in a way to indicate the
existence of a noteworthy peak. Tucker and I agreed that a day’s *dolce far
niente* would be very pleasant, but Moore, whose energy was still unspent,
hankered after a mountain, and settled, if the night was fine, to start at 2
A.M. with Francois, and climb the Schoda (11,128 feet), the bold sumimit of
which rises above the lower ridges on the south of Gebi, and must, from its
isolated position, command a perfect panorama of the main chain. Our plans for
the morrow being thus fixed, we postponed the settlement of our further
arrangements, and retook possession of our mattrass with great satisfaction.

*July 13th.* — The weather changed during the night, and Moore was prevented
from starting for his proposed expedition. In the morning it rained heavily, and
our day was spent chiefly in cooking a sheep we had purchased, and discussing
the means of getting across the wild country at the sources of the Zenes-Squali
to Jibiani, the highest hamlet in Suanetia, close to the glaciers of the Ingur.
The height of this place (7,064 feet) suggested to us the idea of a sort of
Pontresina, whence we should be able to make a series of excursions into the
great mass of mountains marked on its north in the Five Verst Map. Elated by the
successful accomplishment of the two glacier-passes, we planned, about this
time, various magnificent expeditions, which weather and other hindrances
ultimately defeated. We were desirous of coming to such an arrangement with our
porters as might enable us to camp for a day or two at the sources of the Rion,
and see what excursions could be made there. It was, however, so difficult to
make the peasants understand our intentions, and to prove to them that if they
sat and smoked all day, while we climbed a hill, they were not entitled to the
same pay as if they were carrying our luggage over a stiff pass, that we gave up
the attempt in despair; and finally arranged to engage seven men as porters, at
1 rouble and 20 copecks a day apiece, as far as Jibiani, a journey which they
assured us was generally made by hunters in three days. We enquired about a pass
named in the Five Verst Map, and laid down as leading up the glen of the
Tchosura, and over the main chain, into the valley of the Uruch: it was
described as very much of the same character as the Gurdzieveesk Pass.^[^0902]^

The heavy rain, which continued to fall all day, caused the Rion to rise very
rapidly, and to threaten with destruction the bridge below the village, the
centre pile of which, a clumsily-constructed wooden breakwater, was exposed to
the full force of the current. The danger of the whole structure roused the
people from their usual laziness, and delivered us for a time from the constant
crowd of lookers-on. The whole population trooped down to the bank, and carried
stones, to fill up the interior of the framework which supported the centre of
the bridge, in order to give it weight to resist the violent attacks of the
stream. Their efforts were successful for the moment, aud the weather clearing
up late in the afternoon, the river gradually subsided.

Having cooked the necessary supply of meat, purchased some luxuries — such as
sugar, and muddy grape-juice, here called wine — and, as we thought, concluded
our arrangements for porters, we announced our intention of setting out next
morning, and dismissed our visitors.

*July 14th.* — The weather was still showery and unsettled. Our first question
with the villagers was on a claim for higher payment for our food and lodging,
which was at first laid at nearly double the sum we offered, but was very soon
brought down, by firm resistance on our part, to a petition for an extra rouble.
The next difficulty raised was one less easy to settle satisfactorily. The seven
porters for whom we had agreed struck, on the ground that our luggage was the
load of ten men. Anxious to smooth matters, we conceded this point, and allowed
them to fetch three of their friends, whereon the whole team struck again for
higher pay. This we absolutely refused, declaring that, if further difficulties
were made, we would ride down to Oni, and report their behaviour to the
Commandant. The ten, finding that we could be as obstinate as themselves, gave
in, after a long and irritating wrangle, and agreed to come at the pay
previously promised. At last all the packs were separated, and each man’s burden
tied up into a form convenient for transport. After watching the ten defile
before us, and seeing that nothing was left behind, we followed. Having crossed
the bridge, all the men sat down, and held a protracted council with some
friends who joined them, as to which path they should take, while we fumed with
useless impatience.

The ordinary path up the valley follows the left side of the Rion, on which
there is a good deal of cultivation for some distance above Gebi; but news
having been brought in of the destruction of the upper bridge, our porters had
at once crossed to the right bank, and were now discussing how they might best
make their way along it. When the council was at last over, we were led by a
narrow footpath, which mounted steeply through the forest. After climbing
several hundred feet, we left it, and plunged into a dense underwood of
azalea-bushes, now nearly out of blossom, through which we gradually fought our
way back to the level of the Rion. The boulders of the river-bed afforded a less
fatiguing path, and did not hinder our advance so much as the tangled thickets
into which we were often forced to enter. Torrents, emerging from lateral glens
on the south, barred our way, and at first we expended much ingenuity in
attempts to cross them dry-shod, by extemporising bridges with a fallen tree, or
attempting impossible jumps. As each of us in turn failed and got wet, we gave
up the struggle against our too numerous foes, and quietly waded through. After
3½ hours of very slow and tiring progress, aggravated by the sight of meadows
and a fair path on the opposite bank of the river, we came to the broken bridge,
and joined the usual track up the valley. There was now a pause of some duration
in our struggle with untamed nature. It was, however, quite impossible to make
up for lost time by a spurt, as our train of porters absolutely refused to be
hurried, and treated our remonstrances with utter, although good-humoured,
contempt.

The scenery of this portion of the valley does not equal in grandeur that of the
eastern branch, but the woodland effects are very beautiful, and quite unlike
anything in the Alps. Dense forests of deciduous trees, amongst which the beech
and the maple are conspicuous, clothe the lower mountain-sides, which conceal
all view of the snowy chain. Pines gradually disappear, and none are found near
the head of the valley. On a high bank on the right of the Rion, opposite its
junction with the Zopkhetura, a tributary which nearly doubles its volume, are
some fields, the highest cultivated land of the inhabitants of Gebi. Rude wooden
huts have been constructed by the peasants, as shelters for the night when they
come up either to sow, or to gather in their crops. The valley now makes a
sudden bend to the north, and several small streams fall into it from the
surrounding mountains, The path becomes very uneven, winding up and down on the
steep broken slopes on the right side of the river, which flows rapidly in a
broad stony channel. Before long the track was altogether lost, and we followed
out the ideas of the leading porter as to the best line of march — now forcing
our way through the forest, now scrambling over the boulders of the river-bed.
Several strong torrents had to be waded, and the heavy rain which began to fall
completed our wetting, and made us look forward with some dread to camping-out.

The valley contracted almost to a gorge before it opened out slightly, and left
space on the right bank for a meadow and two log-huts, which mark a summer
station of the herds, known to the natives, according to Herr Radde, by the name
of Sassagonelli. The huts were in a very dirty and dilapidated condition, and we
decided at once, despite the wet, to pitch our tent, and leave such
accommodation as they offered to the men. It is not a pleasant thing to put up
even so small and easily-managed a tent as ours was in pouring rain. We had
brought away with us from Gebi a winebagful of the liquid called wine in these
parts, and we now had some of it mulled, in which form it was by no means nasty,
notwithstanding a strong flavour of guttapercha. We had taken over eight hours
to reach Sassagonelli from Gebi, and it grew dusk soon after our arrival; so
soon therefore as we had supped, we tied up the tentdoor, wrapped ourselves
round in our rugs, and made things as snug as possible for the night. Our men
found at least shelter inside the hut, which some of the porters shared with
them. As a rule, the inhabitants of this country care little for any further
protection from the elements than their big sheepskin ❛bourcas,❜ which can be
arranged so as entirely to envelope the figure, and may very likely have given
rise to the fable that the Caucasians are in the habit, when on the march, of
carrying with them small tents, and taking shelter in them from the rainstorms,
for which these mountains are justly celebrated.

*July 14th.* — The morning was fair, and the clouds were blowing off the
surrounding summits when we emerged from our tent. The view up the valley was
closed by the snowy mass of the Edenis-Mta, and a small glacier which descends
from its flanks. The meaning of this name is the Mountain of Paradise, and a
tradition, similar to that told of the ❛Grand Paradis❜ in the Graian Alps, is
related by the inhabitants concerning it. The track we now followed abandoned
the deep-cut channel of the Rion, and climbed the very steep grass slopes of the
range on the west. Even the birch was soon left below, and we found ourselves,
after a long ascent, on a wide sloping pasturage enamelled with alpine flowers,
except in the hollows where the snow still lay unmelted. The roots of the Rion
valley were now at our feet; above them the main chain rose in a steep wall of
rock, over which the two glaciers in which the river has its source poured in
narrow and not very imposing icefalls. To the west the view was limited by the
ridge we had to cross, but behind us, over a gap in the lower hills, rose a
serrated icy crest, the summits of which, although not on a scale of grandeur
comparable to Adai Khokh and its neighbours, would he considered fine mountains
anywhere in the Alps.

Moore had been altogether upset by the hot brew of guttapercha-flavoured
grape-juice in which we had indulged on the previous night, and had great
difficulty in making any progress; so Tucker and I pushed on by ourselves,
leaving Francois to help our friend, and Paul to keep an eye on the team of
porters. We walked briskly over the wide Alp, anxious if possible to reach the
ridge (called by Radde the Goribolo Höhe) before the clouds had again shrouded
the mountain-tops. In this we were unsuccessful. The pasturages were of great
extent, and were linked to the chain separating the Rion and Zenes-Squali by a
long flat-topped ridge, the ascent from which to the actual pass was very
considerable. One of the porters had pointed out to us the spot we were to make
for, a rocky eminence considerably to the right of the lowest point in the
ridge. On reaching it we found that the mists had already enveloped all the
western chain, and that our hopes of learning something of Koschtantan and its
neighbours were disappointed. We had, however, a good view of the western end of
the Rion basin, and of the picturesquely shaped summits of the Schoda chain. At
our feet on the west was a short glen, running down to the wooded ravine of the
Zenes-Squali; a spur parallel to that on which we stood separates the two
sources of that river. A faintly-marked zigzag, by which the peasants of the
Rion valley reach the upper snowfields, and pass over them to the pasturages
round the headwaters of the Tcherek, on the north side of the mountains, could
be traced climbing the steep slopes of the main chain on the west of the Rion
sources. The pass is probably free from serious difficulty, as cattle are
sometimes ❛lifted❜ over it, but it must lead across a wide expanse of snow and
ice.

It will be seen, on any of the modern maps of the Caucasian provinces, that it
is at this point of the chain that the name Pass-Mta is printed, in characters
which seem to indicate the position of a peak only inferior in height and
importance to Elbruz and Kazbek. We could see nothing of the kind, and Radde,
who climbed as far as the pasturage, and was lucky in a clear day, asserts that
the Pass-Mta of the inhabitants of Gebi is nothing more than a rocky buttress
projecting from the main chain. Our predecessor states this clearly in the
following passage : — ❛One is very much surprised, after having looked out so
long on the journey for the Pass-Mta, to find in it nothing imposing or out of
the common. It is far inferior in height not only to the Edenis-Mta, but also to
the Lapuri (a summit lying farther to the north-west), and the flattened dome to
which it rises scarcely attains the height of the snow-line. Its distinguishing
characteristic is that it pushes forward from the main chain, here represented
by the Lapuri and Edenis-Mta, and thus encloses the source of the Rion on one
side, while the ridge called Goribolo shuts it in on the other.❜ 

The solution of the apparent inconsistency between the wide reputation of the
mountain and its real insignificance is not, I think, difficult to discover; to
us, at least, the following explanation seems sufficient and satisfactory. The
name of Pass-Mta has been applied, by the people on the south side of the chain,
to the mountain they cross in going over to the Tcherek. The traveller on the
hills which gird the lowlands of Mingrelia on the south, sees, when looking at
the opposite chain of the Caucasus,a great snowy mass midway between Kazbek and
Elbruz. He does not know its name, and can find no one to tell him, but by the
map he makes out that it must be somewhere near the source of the Rion: the only
mountain well known there is, he is told, the Pass-Mta, so, putting two and two
together, he settles that the great wall of ice which has attracted his
attention, and which is in reality the southern face of the Koschtantau group,
must be the Pass-Mta of the people of Gebi.^[^0903]^ This portion of the chain is the one
which seems most completely to have puzzled geographers, and many books and maps
fall into the serious error of representing the Zenes-Squali as rising entirely
on the southern side of a spur of the main chain. They thus deceive a traveller,
by giving the idea that only one ridge separates the sources of the Rion and
Ingur, whereas it is in reality necessary to cross no less than three in going
from one to the other.

We had been full half an hour on the top before the porters came up, escorted by
Paul; Moore and Francois were not far behind, and we all made our midday meal
together. When it was time to think of pursuing our journey, we enquired what
course was usually taken in descending to the Zenes-Squali: the porters pointed
out a long and manifestly absurd circuit, involving a considerable further
ascent along the ridge on our right. There was no difficulty in going down the
steep shaly rocks and snowfilled gullies immediately below us, into the head of
the valley; but when we intimated our intention of doing so, the men gave us to
understand that if we liked to risk our lives, they did not mean to peril their
own, and that nothing should induce them to follow us.

Having fixed as our meeting-point the junction of the stream in the glen below
us with the eastern Zenes-Squali, we abandoned our train to the consequences of
their folly, and set off down the rocks, which were perfectly easy to anyone of
mountaineering habits. A short scramble enabled us to get into a snow-filled
trough, down which we slid rapidly, until the foot of the declivity was reached,
and the gully came to an end amongst stones and uneven ground, cut into deep
furrows by the melting of the winter snows. At first the vegetation, amongst
which we again found ourselves, took the form of stunted bushes, the tangled
branches of which might occasionally trip us up, but offered no material
impediment to our progress. As the trees grew thicker, and no trace of path
appeared, we were glad to take advantage of the partially dry bed of a torrent,
which was narrow enough to permit of our jumping from side to side as occasion
required. When it joined the main stream, and no space was left between the
foaming waters and the steep bank, we were obliged to enter the wood. First, we
forced our way through a dense thicket, where we had to push aside the upper
branches with our arms, whilst we scrambled as best we could in and out of deep
rivulet-beds, and over or under the trunks of partially-fallen or prostrate
trees. On emerging into a glade, we did not find our condition much bettered by
the change. Although at a distance, and when seen from above, the smooth and
flowery surface had suggested no difficulties, we now found that it was composed
of a dense growth of umbelliferous plants, growing to an average height of six
feet above the ground.^[^0904]^ We were at first at a loss whether to admire the
extraordinary luxuriance of the cloak which nature has spread over the soil in
this mountain region, or to grumble at the toil it cost us to make each step in
advance; but the latter sentiment soon gained the mastery.

Moore, unwell as he was, could not maintain the exertion without repose, and we
left him to follow at his leisure in our trail, which once made was far too
broad to be missed. Treading down ruthlessly under our feet alike the dense
masses of hemlock and the tall spikes of gorgeous tiger-lilies, we slowly drew
near to the junction of the two glens. In the thickest of the wood we came upon
a track which seemed somewhat too broad for that of a man; it led us to a hollow
trunk, the home of a bear; but the brown gentleman was out for his afternoon’s
stroll, and we had not the pleasure of making his acquaintance, although we
valiantly took the covers oft our ice-axes, and got ready our revolvers, in case
of a chance encounter with a cub. We were never lucky enough to see a bear,
except in captivity, while in the Caucasus: indeed, we scarcely saw any wild
animals, much to our surprise, as we had been told that bears, bouquetin, and
chamois abounded on the higher mountains. It must be remembered that we never
went out of our way to look for game; of its existence there can be no doubt,
and this very glen is a favourite hunting-ground with the inhabitants of
Laschketi, the highest village in the valley, who come here in winter on
snow-shoes. They form a party, consisting of as many as forty or fifty hunters,
surround a large tract of country, and drive the game together. In this way
thirty-one bouquetin were killed in one day in the winter of 1863 64.

:::: { .wrap-80 .caption }
![Source of the Eastern Zenes-Squali.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0282.jpg "Source of the Eastern Zenes-Squali."){#b282}
::::

We halted where the valleys met on a large level meadow, of course covered with
a crop of tall-stemmed, broad-leaved herbage, on the banks of the eastern branch
of the Zenes-Squali. The valley is closed by a rocky cirque, the centre of which
is occupied by the Lapuri glacier, terminating abruptly on the edge of a cliff,
down which the stream makes its way in a bold leap. After waiting for more than
two hours without seeing or hearing anything of the porters, whose figures had
been visible on the skyline long after we had reached the bottom of the glen, we
reflected that we should be unable to push any further that evening, and that it
would be as well to make what preparations we could for our bivouac. A spring of
clear water, which burst out of the stony channel of the Zenes-Squali, served to
fix the position of our camp, and we proceeded to cut down the herbage, dig up
stones with our ice-axes, and level the inequalities of the soil. We finished
our work, and still no porters arrived: at last, after we had waited for them
four hours, our shouts were answered, and we distinguished the train rambling
leisurely along on the opposite bank of the river. We called to them to recross
the stream, to do which they were obliged to extemporise a bridge by throwing a
fallen log across it. No rain had fallen during the day, and our camp was
consequently more enjoyable. Paul, with the aid of our little kitchen, prepared
us a capital dinner of soup, cold mutton, broiled ham, and tea, which even Moore
— who had by this time rejoined us, and recovered from his sickness — was able
to enjoy. During the night we were pestered by swarms of mosquitoes, and small
but very venomous black flies, which, despite all our endeavours, found their
way into the tent, and most effectually murdered sleep.

*July 15th.* — The valley was filled with clouds, which threatened rain before
the day was much older. We packed up our tent, and, after the usual delays, got
off about 7.15 A.M.. At once crossing the river, we struck the bed of a small
stream descending from a hollow in the range on the west side of the valley. The
stones in the channel were of no great size, and we made comparatively rapid
progress, ascending gradually until the woods on either side thinned, and we
found ourselves in a recess surrounded by steep but not lofty ridges of a loose
shaly rock. The deeply-indented gap, through which we must pass to reach the
valley of the western Zenes-Squali, was now clearly visible in front; the ascent
to it was at first up an exceedingly steep grass-slope utterly pathless, and for
the last 150 feet by a narrow trough. How Herr Radde’s guides can by any
possibility have succeeded in getting horses over this pass we could never
understand, although the feats performed by Caucasian steeds are truly
marvellous, whether on snow or rock.

When, in two hours from our camp, we reached the summit of the Noschka Pass
(8,460 feet), we found that there was a snow-filled trough on the farther side
exactly similar to that by which we had ascended. The view must at all times be
limited by the higher ranges close at hand, and now even the summits of these
were concealed by clouds. The porters again pretended to think the direct
descent too steep, but, with the result of the day before as an argument in our
favour, we were not disposed to let them have their own way, and insisted on
their taking advantage of the route nature had provided in the snow-gully at our
feet. Having started the whole troop — who descended with an air of the greatest
trepidation, and screamed with fright when one of us above dislodged a small
stone which fell amongst them — we followed ourselves by a rapid glissade, but,
warned by previous experience not to leave the porters, we accommodated our pace
to theirs, which was in consequence somewhat improved.

A long wooded slope led down to the western Zenes-Squali. The herbage was as
rank and the woods as thick as on the day before, but we avoided some of the
fatigue by allowing the whole train of twelve men to march before us, and taking
advantage of the trail thus formed. We got on at a very fair pace down to the
left bank of the stream, into which a pretty waterfall tumbled from the opposite
hillside. The skirt of the Maschquar glacier, from which it takes its rise, was
visible under the clouds at the head of the valley. The whole afternoon, from 12
till 6.15 P.M., was spent in forcing our way down the wildest valley we met with
in the whole course of our wanderings. There was no trace of path, so, following
the custom of the country, we clambered for some distance over the boulders in
the channel of the river, and when this was impossible, forced our way through
the virgin forest which lines its banks. Dense thickets, prostrate logs, and
swamps into which we sank deep at every step, were the leading features of the
wall, while the same luxuriant vegetation which we had before encountered was
everywhere remarkable.

Heavy rain now began, and continued to fall for the rest of the day. Our guides
seemed confident in their knowledge of the right direction through this
wilderness, and tramped on with praiseworthy perseverance, diverting the tedium
of the march, sometimes by raising a wild monotonous chaunt,^[^0905]^ led by one man,
with a refrain taken up in succession by his companions — sometimes by
excursions in quest of the stalks of a huge umbelliferous plant, for which their
appetite seemed insatiable. Each man must have cut and peeled for himself
several pounds of this juicy but tasteless vegetable food in the course of the
day. When it became necessary to cross the river, the water was too deep and
violent to be forded, but a young tree was soon felled, and laid across to
enable us to pass. The valley, the configuration of which is most incorrectly
represented in the Five Verst Map, now broadened out, and a cirque crowned by
snowy peaks and some small glaciers opened on the right.

A densely-wooded spur projected from the main chain, turning the course of the
valley we were following more directly south, and separating it from the glen of
the Scena. The scenery here is probably very striking in fine weather, We passed
a hunter’s lair sheltered under a bank, and soon afterwards noticed the ruins of
a tower rising out of the dense forest, and affording a proof that these
solitudes have not always been so deserted as they are now. On our right, deep
channels were cut through the friable soil by the glacier-streams, the passage
of which cost us a good deal of time and trouble. We had now attained a height
of from 500 to 800 feet above the river, and a bend in its course enabled us to
look down to its junction with the Scena, the point fixed on as the probable
limit of our day’s walk. The slopes we were traversing were exceedingly steep,
and it was an immense relief when our porters happily hit on a faint hunter’s
trail, which, though frequently lost, was always recovered after a slight delay.
The channel of the river beneath us was narrowed into a gorge, and the opposite
mountain-side was even steeper than that we were laboriously traversing. As we
drew near to the angle of the mountain, which projects over the confluence of
the Scena and the western Zenes-Squali, pines mingled with the deciduous trees,
and lower down their gigantic cones of sombre foliage clothed, from top to
bottom, the sides of the tremendous ravine into which the valley contracted.

The scene, which revealed itself, bit by bit, through the breaks in a dense veil
of mist, was one of the most savage of its kind imaginable, and totally unlike
anything I had ever seen, except in some of the mountain landscapes of Gustave
Doré. Meantime the rain fell in merciless torrents, which even the thickest
pine-branches could only partially keep out. It seemed as though we should never
reach the entrance of the Scena valley, but at last the corner of the mountain
was turned, and we began to descend; the forest grew thicker, and a few hundred
feet above the stream, we found a group of pines so dense that a patch of ground
beneath them was still fairly dry, and promised to afford our men a better
resting-place than they could have hoped for. The first thing to do was to set
up the tent as quickly as possible, no pleasant or easy task, when the ropes and
strings were all in a soppy condition. Once inside, we tried to put on dry
clothes, the waterproof saddlebags having gallantly withstood the rain, and
preserved their contents from wet. Our tent was always small, and the sloping
sides, which in fine weather could be stretched taut, were apt when wet to flop
heavily against our faces whenever we attempted to sit up, in a way calculated
to test the temper of even a Mark Tapley. This inconvenience much hampered the
proceedings of the two outsiders, one of whom expressed in no measured terms his
disgust at the situation, and his wish that he was enjoying the
creature-comforts of Piitigorsk. The man in the middle saw things in a more
cheerful light, and the spirits of all were a little raised by the arrival of
Paul with some broiled ham and tea. The porters had made a roaring five in the
centre of the dry plot, and the glimpse of the group of picturesque peasants
clustered round the blaze, and the dark background of pines, revealed to us as
our tent-door was thrown open, was enough to repay us for all the disagreeables
of the day. Wrapping ourselves round in the driest folds of our rugs, which
shared in the general humidity, we composed ourselves for the night, in hopes
that the rainstorm of the day had been too heavy to last.

:::: { .wrap-80 .caption }
![Our Camp-fire in the Forest.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0289.jpg "Our Camp-fire in the Forest."){#b289}
::::

*July 17th.* — The morning was cloudy, but not actually wet. Our porters assured
us that we should arrive early in the afternoon at Jibiani, and, in the still
unsettled state of the weather, we looked forward with pleasure to the prospect
of again sleeping under a roof. We had now to mount the valley of the Scena, the
most western of the three principal sources of the Zenes-Squali. Our course lay
at first almost due west, but after a time the valley bent round to the north,
and we began to ascend rapidly by the side of the stream, which foams at the
bottom of a deep and narrow cleft. For the first half-hour we were in the
forest, which was composed of noble pines, though the trees were not equal in
size to those on the further side of the river. A narrow path, always
ill-defined and in places scarcely traceable, led across meadows of the rankest
herbage, gay with subalpine flowers, lilies, lupins, and vetches, which showered
down heavy drops on us as we passed. The ruins of a village, or some huts, could
be distinguished amongst the trees on the opposite side of the valley. To our
surprise the path grew more distinct the further we went, and gradually assumed
the character of a sledge-track. It led through thickets of underwood, and over
much marshy ground, the source of numerous springs, which hurry to reinforce the
torrent, here leaping noisily over the granite boulders it has brought down with
it from the central chain.

When we reached the level ground at the actual head of the valley, we found that
the bridge over the Scena, which the peasant who acted as guide assured us had
existed when he last made this journey, was now no more, and that we must make
the best of our way through the water. The stream proved fordable, but the
strength and speed of the current were so considerable, that some care was
needful to avoid missing one’s footing amongst the boulders. The scenery at the
source of the Scena must be very imposing in clear weather. The usual clouds cut
off all view of the summits, but did not conceal the twin icefalls of the
Korüldü glacier, which, unlike the other glaciers of the Zenes-Squali, survives
its fall, and re-makes itself at the bottom of the glen. It is surrounded by
abrupt snow-streaked cliffs of great height. The track, now broad and distinct,
turned sharply up the steep western hillside, and raised us to the verge of a
wide upland pasturage, surrounded by comparatively low ridges. The slopes were
bare of trees, but covered with rhododendron-bushes, and with a beautiful
herbage, short in comparison to that found lower down in the valley, but capable
of feeding immense herds of cows and goats. It was the sort of scene which in
the Alps would have been enlivened by numerous chalets, but here there was
nothing of the sort, and Francois, who longed to transport the whole hillside
within reach of Chamonix, was loud in his lamentations over the shortcomings of
a population who could allow such natural riches to run to waste.

The stream which waters these pasturages bears the name of Lastilagel. It has
three sources, and there is more than one way of crossing from its basin to the
headwaters of the Ingur. We descended somewhat, in order to cross the main
stream, which flows in a deeplycut channel, and having made our midday halt on
its banks, climbed a long and steep zigzag, from the top of which the path bore
away at a level, on the left of the most southern source of the Lastilagel. The
snow had apparently melted very recently, and the ground was saturated with
moisture. The stream we had followed is nourished by the springs of an upper
level of pasturages, rising to a broad saddle which forms the Naksagar Pass
(8,813 feet)—the watershed between the Inmour and the Zenes-Squali. The pass
itself is so broad and flat at the top, that it is difficult to tell the exact
moment when the summit is reached. Round grass-covered hills shat in the view on
all sides; the sledge-track goes downhill, at first very gently, afterwards more
rapidly, but there is no point where the descent can be called steep. The
stream, which rises on the west side of the pass, and joins the Ingur at
Jibiani, is called the Quirischi. The path, becoming broader and more beaten as
it draws nearer the village, clings to the slopes on the right bank of the
torrent, which is joined by another flowing through a short glen from the steep
and jagged flanks of the Ugua

Signs of an inhabited country now followed one another in rapid succession.
Large herds of heifers were feeding on the slopes, the projecting knolls were
crowned with stonemen, and we passed presently a hut near which was a cluster of
women and boys, wilder and more unkempt-looking specimens than any we had yet
seen. A tall tower. a portion of a now ruined castle (said to have been built by
Queen Thamara), appeared perched on a commanding knoll on the left bank of the
stream, and gave us the first warning of our approach to Jibiani. Our Gebi
porters. instead of seeming anxious to finish their job, took every possible
occasion to loiter on the road, and we vainly endeavoured to incite the slow
unwilling train to a final spurt. Our entrance to Jibiani, and the commencement
of our Suanetian experiences, will be best placed at the beginning of a new
chapter.

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^0900]: [Herr Abich alludes to this glacier in the following terms:— ❛A superb glacier of the first class descends on the north from the Adai-Khokh group between the ridges of Bordjoula and of Saourdaour. It is the Khaltschi-Don glacier. It is at least 1.500 feet broad, and traverses the forest region for a great distance. Approaching the village of Zenaga, it descends to a Level of 5,700 feet, the lowest point known to be reached by any Caucasian glacier.❜]{.footnote}

[^0901]: [The torrent issuing from it is called the Karagam, a name which seems the most appropriate for the glacier.]{.footnote}

[^0902]: [These two passes are laid down by Klaproth in the map appended to his ❛Voyage au Mont Caucase.❜ published in 1823, and he describes at ~ some length his journey across them in the year 1809, Starting from Mozdok, on the north side of the chain, he ascended the Uruch valley and crossed the Geli-Ga Pass, to which he gives the name of Tziti-Klonz, but which is no doubt the pass of the Five Verst Map, above referred to. He descended the Rion valley as far as Oni, but was deterred from going further by the disturbed state of the country, and therefore retraced his steps, regaining the Uruch valley by a pass which can be no other than the Gurdzieveesk. In both cases the details of the actual passage of the chain are very meagre and unsatisfactory, but many particulars are given of the valleys on either side which could scarcely have been acquired by hearsay, The part of the story most hard to believe is that horses were got over both passes: so far as the Gurdzieveeskis concerned, we should certainly have declared it impracticable even for the steeds of the Caucasus.<br />Dubois de Montpereux denies the truth of Klaproth's statement on the authority of the inhabitants of Mozdok: but they were little likely to know anything about the matter, and I do not think their opinion is of much value.]{.footnote}

[^0903]: [I have been confirmed in this theory, since I wrote the above, by seeing, in the Atlas to Dubois de Montpereux' ❛Caucase,❜ a profile of the Caucasian chain, in which the outline of Tau Tötönal and the Jibiani peaks is elearly given, and the name Pass-Mta is applied to them.]{.footnote}

[^0904]: [According to Herr Radde (who is an eminent botanist), this phenomenon of the vegetable world is thus produced :— ❛The frosts of autumn kill down the summer's growth, and leave it rotting on the ground; the rich soil formed by its decay is covered by the winter snows, often to a depth of thirty feet. As spring advances, the water of the melting snow percolates the ground, and when it s at last laid bare to the warm rays of a Caucasian sun, the herbs spring from the saturated soil, as from a hotbed.❜ Whatever may be the cause, it is certain that the Zenes-Squali would gain a prize tor weeds anywhere.]{.footnote}

[^0905]: [Herr Radde has been at the pains to collect and translate many of these songs, which seem to possess more meaning and merit than would be imagined by a person hearing, for the first time, the succession of gutturals and uncouth exclamations of which they consist.]{.footnote}
