# CHAPTER X.<br /><small> SUANETIA. </small>{#ten .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Free Suanetia, Past and Present — Herr Radde’s Experiences — Physical Features —
Fortified Villages — Jibiani — Pious  Savages — A  Surprise — Glaciers of the
Ingur — Petty Theft — Threats of Robbery — Alarms and Excursions — A Stormy
Parting — The Horseman's Home — The Ruined Tower — A Glorious Icefall — Adisch —
Sylvan Scenery — The Mushalaliz — Suni — Ups and Downs — Midday Halt — Latal — A
Suanetian Farmhouse — Murder no Crime — Tau Totonal — A Sensation Scene — The
Caucasian Matterhorn — Pari at last — Hospitable Cossacks.
<br /><br />
::::


SUANETIA is the general name bestowed by geographers on the upper valley of the
Ingur, and is derived from the inhabitants, who from very ancient times have
been called the Suani, or Suanetians. This people is not, however, entirely
confined to the valley of the Ingur, as many of the higher villages on the
Zenes-Squali are occupied by the same race. Their inhabitants are now
distinguished from their neighbours round the sources of the Ingur, as the
Dadian’s Suanetians, from having been subject to a native prince who bore the
title of Dadian. His authority, or that of other members of the same family,
extends over the western portion of the Ingur basin; but the groups of hamlets,
which cluster thickly in the network of glens containing the sources of the
stream, are at the present time independent, and are known as Free Suanetia.

Since Russia has succeeded in converting her long nominal suzerainty over the
Caucasus into real dominion, the native princes have naturally been treated by
her simply as landed proprietors with certain manorial rights. Constantin
Dadisch-Kilian, the Suanetian prince, resident at Pari, was about eight years
ago suspected of some intrigue, and was in consequence summoned, by the Governor
of Mingrelia, to meet him at Kutais. He obeyed the summons, and was told that he
must leave his home and live tor the future in Russia. High words ensued; the
Russian officer was firm, the Prince grew violent, and finally, drawing his
dagger, stabbed and killed the Governor. He escaped for the moment, but was
ultimately taken and shot at Kutais. His former residence, Pari, was selected as
the Russian military post in Suanetia, and for a short time the whole district
was kept under control by a considerable force. The expense and difficulty
experienced in carrying out the unprofitable task of preserving order in this
mountain fastness appear to have disgusted the Government, which probably
thought that if the free Suanetians were left to fight out their quarrels, the
race woald, like Kilkenny cats, soon be self-exterminated. Whatever the motive,
the troops were withdrawn, and ten Cossacks, stationed at Pari, are the entire
executive force at the disposal of the chief of the district, and the upper or
western valleys are, for all practical purposes, independent, and at full
liberty to follow their own wicked ways of theft and murder, to their hearts'
content.

This is, I believe, a correct description of the present state of the country.
Its past history is obscure and complicated, and I cannot pretend to have made
any very deep researches concerning it. Suanetia seems usually to have been
united with Mingrelia, but at times to have been treated as a province of the
Imeritian kingdom. The internal disorder to which Imeritia was the prey, and the
weakness of its rulers, aided the Suanetians in establishing their independence.

At the end of the fourteenth century, they made a successful foray into the
Radscha, and burned Kutais; worsted in the field, they were again compelled to
submit to Imeritia, and a prince was imposed on them, whose usual residence was
on the Zenes-Squali. During the fifteenth century, we again find the Suanetians
at war with their southern neighbours. After ten years’ hard fighting, they were
forced to surrender the Upper Rion district, as the penalty for the murder of an
Leritian prince. Traces of their former connection with Suanetia may still be
recognised in the style of building and the towers of Chiora and Gebi, and their
inhabitants are still looked upon by the population of the Radscha as a foreign
race. By degrees the people about the Ingur sources established their
independence, but members of the princely family, known by the title of
Dadisch-Kilian, were, at the time of the establishment of the Russian dominion,
still regarded as the feudal chiefs of the lower villages on the Ingur, and, as
such, took the oath of allegiance to the Czar.

Ethnologists seem to have come to the conclusion that the Suanetians are a
branch of the Georgian family, and a study of their language has convinced Herr
Radde that it has much in common with the Imeritian and Mingrelian dialects.
When it is remembered that in the eleven upper communities on the Ingur, after
the successful assertion of their independence, a fugitive from the lower
country could obtain not only immunity from punishment for past offences, but
also personal liberty, and freedom from princely exactions, it will not be
thought wonderful that the population of this district at the present day bears
marks of a mixed origin.

Thus much for the history of Suanetia. As to the character of the people, I
shall quote Herr Radde, the latest traveller to this country, and the only one,
I believe, who, aided by all the facilities the Russian authorities could give
him, and by his knowledge of the native dialects, has set himself seriously to
work to study the customs and manners of this sequestered mountain-tribe. This
gentleman arrived at Jibiani in company with a native priest, who served as his
introducer to the villagers. He found them engaged in hostilities with the
neighbouring hamlet of Murkmur, and men wounded in the skirmishes, which were of
constant occurrence, were brought in from time to time during his stay. The Herr
was here robbed of a horse, which was only recovered after much trouble. To
avoid the scene of battle, instead of descending the valley, he made his way
across the mountains, and slept in the open air, in order to pass through the
village of Adisch by night, on account of the ill-name borne by its inhabitants.
At Pari, the former residence of the native princes, and present post of Russian
Cossacks, he stayed for some days, collecting information as to the language,
ballads, and customs of the country. The result of his experiences and
researches he sums up in the following words : — ❛Amongst the Suanetians
intelligent faces are seldom found. In their countenances insolence and rudeness
are prominent, and hoary-headed obstinacy is often united to the stupidity of
savage animal life. Amongst these people, individuals are frequently met with
who have committed ten or more murders, which their standard of morality not
only permits, but in many cases commands, They are of a taciturn disposition,
and their manner when endeavouring to impose upon strangers is most
disagreeable.❜

I may add to this the opinion of Malte Brun, who says of the Suanetians : —
❛Nothing can equal their want of cleanliness, their rapacity, and their skill in
making weapons. We may consider the Pthirophagi, or eaters of vermin, who
according to Strabo inhabited this country, as the progenitors of the Suanes.❜
No character can be more accurate, only that at the present day the relations of
the vermin and the population have been reversed.

The nature of the country has no doubt had o great share in forming the savage
and wild character of its inhabitants. A large basin, forty miles long by about
fifteen broad, is shut in on all sides by glacier-crowned ridges, and the only
access to it from the outer world is by means of a narrow, and at times
impassable, ravine, or over lofty mountain-passes. The main chain of the
Caucasus forms its boundary on the north, and this reaches its greatest
elevation and true central point in the huge glacier-seamed, peak-surmounted
wall which towers over the sources of the Ingur. Tau Tötönal (or Tetnuld) must
be over 16,000 feet, and the summits of the serrated range, which stretches from
it to the east for several miles, do not average less than 15,000 feet in
height. Three glaciers, the Nuamquam, the Goroscho, and the Adisch, pour down
from this wall into three separate glens. They descend to a level of about 7,000
feet, which may be taken as the lowest point reached by glaciers on the southern
side of the Caucasus. The chain between Tau Tötönal and Uschba (called also
Besotch-Mta by Radde) makes a semicircular sweep to the north, and at least two
considerable glaciers, the Gatun Tau and the Thuber, descend from it into the
Mushalaliz branch of the main valley. Uschba itself is a gigantic promontory,
standing out between the glens of two of the northern tributaries of the Ingur;
like so many others of the great peaks, it does not seem to be on the watershed,
but it is the only one I know that is on the southern side.

A long lateral ridge, forming the western boundary of the Nakra valley, through
which one of the best-known passes leads to the northern side of the mountains,
runs out at right-angles to the central chain, and forms the limit of Suanetia
on the west. Its spurs are separated from those of the Leila mountains, which
intervene on the south between Suanetia and the lower country, only by the
deeply-cut and densely-wooded gorge through which the Ingur makes its escape.
The Leila chain is of considerable height; several of its peaks exceed 12,000
feet, and the glaciers on its northern flanks are by no means despicable. Its
formidable barrier runs in an unbroken line along the south bank of the Ingur,
and is connected at the source of that river with the main ridge of the
Caucasus, by a grass-covered range (crossed by us in passing from the
Zenes-Squali to Jibiani), which thus completes the circle of mountain barriers
with which nature has fortified this region. The topography of the interior of
the Upper Ingur basin is exceedingly complicated, and can only be understood by
careful study of a map. The stream of the Ingur flows generally along the foot
of the Leila range; the country to the north, between it and the main chain, is
divided by spurs, none of which attain the snow-level, into ravines and
meadow-basins, through which flow tributary streams coming from the glaciers
above. These are of a greater size, and descend lower into the valleys, than
anywhere else on the southern side of the Caucasus.

The foregoing description will have prepared my readers for the character of the
people whom we are about to encounter, and, if read with a map, way assist those
who care to follow our wanderings through the intricacies of the Ingur sources.
We had not had time to study attentively Herr Radde’s volume before leaving
Tiflis, and had no reason to anticipate a worse reception or greater
difficulties than we had previously met with; so that, wearied out with the
dawdling ways and monotonous chants of our Gebi men, we had looked forward with
some pleasure to dismissing them, and making a fresh start. We hoped to spend
several days at Jibiani, and to make it our headquarters for the exploration of
the surrounding mountains. The Five Verst Map showed us that behind the
watershed of the main chain, situated on a northern spur, stood two great peaks,
Koschtantau and Dychtan, respectively 17,096 and 16,925 feet in height — both
therefore higher than Kazbek; and our object was to gain the watershed, at some
point whence we might enjoy a view of these giants, and of the glaciers
surrounding them. It was therefore with feelings of pleasure, unmixed with any
apprehension, that we hailed our first glimpse of Jibiani, Tschubiani, and
Murkmur, a community known collectively by the name of Uschlkul.

Most of the villages in Suanetia are in clusters of two to four, and go by a
collective name, distinct from the individual appellation of each knot of
houses. Adisch is, I think, a solitary exception to this rule. Jibiani and
Tschubiani are built on the projecting brow above the junction of the
Quirischiwith the infant Inguar, which has here run but a few miles from its
cradle in the glaciers of Schkariand Nuamguam, at the base of the great chain.
Murkmur is a little lower down, and on the opposite or right bank of the united
torrents. The appearance presented by these hamlets was most strange and
picturesque. The meadows at our feet were dotted by an array of stone-built
towers, irregularly grouped — some of them white, but the majority of various
shades of dinginess. In the three villages, all of which were in sight at the
same time, there cannot have been less than sixty towers. The only comparison
which will give an idea of the appearance from a distance of these fortified
Suanetian villages (for they are all alike), is to picture a group of
square-sided armless windmills, closely crowded together, and surrounded by low
stone-built barns with sloping roofs. The situation of Jibiani is not striking,
when the peaks of the Nuamquam are veiled in clouds. The slopes above the
village are rounded and bare, or only partially clothed with low brushwood, and
the traveller fancies himself carried back to the valley of the Ardon or Terek.

Our porters volunteered to introduce us to the inhabitants, and to aid us in
obtaining some kind of lodging. On first entering the place we did not find many
of the houseowners at home, The first barn that was offered us we declined, on
account of its gloomy and dirty appearances; a second was then shown, which was
a shade cleaner, although scarcely less gloomy, owing to the extraordinary
smallness of the loopholes which served as windows. It had, however, the
advantage of a smooth plot of grass outside the door, where we could sit in the
sunshine, when there was any. Our parting with the Gebi porters was of o very
friendly character. They were in a hurry to start on their return, so we paid
them at once, giving each man a trifle over the contract price, which, after the
numerous differences we had had on the road, was more than they expected. Though
lazy and stupid, they were free from more active vices, and were, in fact, far
more of fools than knaves. Having purchased some provision for their return
march, of the high price of which they loudly complained, the ten set off the
same evening, unwilling apparently to trust themselves a minute longer than they
could help to the friendly disposition of the Jibiani populace.

A crowd of villagers had by this time collected on the green outside our
quarters, and formed a circle round us. We were struck at once with the wholly
savage aspect of the assemblage, especially of the children, who pressed to the
front to stare at us. The men, and even boys, were all armed with daggers; many
also had pistols attached to their belts, or guns, in sheepskin covers slung
across their shoulders. Their clothes were far shabbier and more tattered than
those of the peasants of the Rion valley; the ordinary Caucasian type of costume
was still distinguishable, but the coats were often sleeveless, and the
headpiece was nothing more than a bit of rag tied into the form of a turban.
Some of the men wore sheepskin caps turned inside out, a peculiar arrangement,
which at the same time shaded their eyes, and added to the uncouth ferocity of
their appearance. The women were uniformly ugly, and their dress presented no
peculiar character to attract attention; it was simply a shapeless bundle of
rags. The children were wild-looking ragamuffins, with matted locks, and ran
about half-naked, clad in one tattered garment of old cloth or sacking; some of
the girls had the most savage faces, more like brute animals than human beings.

:::: { .wrap-80 .caption }
![A Native of Jibiani.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0300.jpg "A Native of Jibiani."){#b300}
::::

We told Paul he must set to work to get us some dinner, and for this purpose it
was necessary to purchase food of the villagers, as we had eaten up the sheep
killed at Gebi. We were dismayed at being refused milk or cheese — butter is
unknown in this part of the country — on the very unexpected ground of its being
a fast-day of the Church. Jibiani was scarcely the place where one would have
looked to find the outward forms of religion scrupulously observed, and the rule
of fasting seemed to be peculiar, as we were allowed to purchase fowls and eggs.
There was no fireplace or chimney in our barn, so, to avoid filling the place
with smoke, Paul endeavoured to do his cooking in an open shed close by. Each
little purchase, such as eggs and firewood, had to be paid for separately, and
at once; no change could be obtained, and although we were, fortunately, fairly
supplied with small ten and twenty-copeck pieces, it was often difficult to make
up the exact sums called for. As a rule, in the Central Caucasus, all the
natives, though preferring silver, will take the Russian paper-money, only the
notes must be new; if in the slightest degree torn, they are, in nine cases out
of ten, absolutely refused.

Paul was much hampered in his movements by the crowd of stupidly curious men and
inquisitive children, and we agreed that in future cooking must be done inside
the barn, even at the expense of a little discomfort from smoke. The furniture
of our quarters consisted of a long wooden bench, and a layer of hay in one
corner, the thickness of which was, at our request, doubled by a fresh
importation. There was no bolt to our door, and as long as daylight lasted we
were more or less troubled by visitors, who dawdled in and out, and stood by the
half-hour, gazing at our proceedings with an air of absolute stupidity which was
provoking to witness. When we got rid of them for the night, we drew the bench
across the door, piled our baggage in the corner close to us, and with our
revolvers under our heads dropped off to sleep.

*July 18th.* — Francois, who was the first to go out in the morning, came back
with the intelligence that there was ❛quelque chose a voir.❜ On our following
him out of the barn, and looking towards the head of the valley, where on the
previous afternoon nothing but clouds had been visible, our eyes were greeted by
an enormously high mass of rock seamed with snow and ice. Over breakfast we held
a consultation as to our arrangements, and agreed that, at all events, the day
must be spent at Jibiani, and that we might walk up towards the sources of the
Ingur, and gain a view of the glaciers from which it rises, while Paul and
Francois were employed in cleaning and mending the parts of our equipment which
had been injured in our journey from Gebi, and in bargaining for and cooking a
sheep. On a knoll above the village stands the church of Jibiani, which, like
all those in Suanetia, is a low square building without tower or belfry. Radde
met with some opposition when he proposed to enter it, and we did not attempt to
do so. According to him, the interior contains a collection of the horns of
chamois and bouquetin, two crosses on either side of the altar, and some remains
of rude frescoes on the walls.

The path, after mounting for some little distance on the left bank of the
stream, crossed it by a bridge, from which there was a picturesque view down the
cleft through which the water finds a channel. On the way we passed herds of
cattle, all bullocks, and families of lean pigs, wandering about the hillside.
The head of the valley is occupied by a wide bare pasturage, above which the
central chain rises in a gigantic wall, supporting two glaciers, the Schkari and
the Nuamquam. An hour’s walk above the village was sufficient to give us a
perfect view of this great mountain ❛cirque.❜ The prospect from a scenic point
of view was superb, but offered very little encouragement to a sober-minded
mountaineer. Opposite us the range was crowned by a massive rock-peak, and the
lines of icefall and prepicice on both sides of it seemed equally inaccessible.
If anyone ever gets over to the north side of the chain from this point, it will
be by a route as unpromising at first sight as, and probably more difficult in
the passage than, the face of Monte Rosa above Macugnaga; indeed, the Italian
side of Monte Rosa is the only mountain-wall in the Alps on a scale to vie with
this part of the Caucasian chain. Finding the clouds were already covering the
summits, and that we should gain nothing by pushing our researches further, we
lay down on the turf for some time, and gave ourselves up to the enjoyment of
the double luxury of fine scenery, and freedom from persecution by inquisitive
natives.

The reflection that we had all our arrangements to make for our journey to Pari,
at the further end of the valley, and that our men had better not be left alone
with the villagers longer than necessary, somewhat hastened our return. We found
Francois, as usual on a rest-day, immersed in the cares of the laundry; Paul was
in a state of just irritation at the proceedings of the people, but had made
considerable advances towards an arrangement which seemed likely to render our
further journey easy. A man had come to him, and offered to provide, by the next
morning, two horses to carry our luggage. This worthy’s name sounded like Islam,
and he recommended himself as the inhabitant of a lower and less barbarous
village, as having been for some time in the service of native prince, and as
being now in receipt of a pension for services rendered to the Russian
Government. We were only too glad to secure his assistance, and willingly
ratified the bargain entered into by Paul.

During our absence, the tent, our mattrass, and other articles, which were still
damp after the rainstorms of the Zenes-Squali, had been put out to dry in the
sunshine. The villagers took advantage of the numerous objects which divided the
attention of our men to commit sundry petty thefts: some English string, a
couple of spoons, a stray volume of Tennyson, and a tent-pole, made up the list
of our losses; the latter was the most important, as, from its peculiar
construction, it would have been impossible to replace it.

During the afternoon, the behaviour of the crowd on the grassplot round our barn
became more and more unpleasant; familiarity was evidently producing its
proverbial result, and we began to wonder what would be the upshot, and whether
the success of petty theft would encourage attempts at open robbery. For some
time we were amused in watching the athletic sports of the juvenile portion of
the population, who were enjoying themselves on a piece of level ground on the
opposite side of the sunken lane which led up to our barn. The popular game
seemed to be for one boy to seize another’s head-gear, and retain possession of
it, by flight or struggles, as long as possible. Girls as well as boys took part
in the amusement, which was of a very violent and noisy description, and was at
times enlivened by a general scrimmage, which reminded me of a ❛rouge❜ in an
Eton football match. Unfortunately, the game was too exhausting to be long
continued, and when the players joined the group, already sufficiently rude and
troublesome, which surrounded us, we found it necessary to carry in all our
possessions,and to retire ourselves into the shelter of our barn, unless we
wished to incur further loss, and to submit to a close overhauling of our own
persons, and such things as we carried about them. When the populace understood
that there was nothing more to be seen outside, they came to the natural
conclusion that they had better follow us in, and we soon found ourselves
sitting in a knot in front of our possessions, and closely pressed upon by a
growing crowd — some of the people simply sucking their thumbs and staring in
stupid astonishment, while others, more lively, pointed in our faces the finger
of covetousness, or of scorn, as the case might be. These persecutions grew too
troublesome to be borne without a protest, so, wanting to eat our supper, we
called the owner of the barn, and told him that we desired to be left alone, and
that the crowd must and should turn out. Finding that we might repeat this
sentiment as often as we liked without result, we took active measures, walked
the people out before us, and shut the doors. After some talking and jeering
outside they were violently kicked open. We again shut them, but, expecting the
offence would be repeated, I waited close by, and sallying out unexpectedly,
caught a boy in the act; the culprit was summarily collared and shaken,
whereupon he made feeble demonstrations with his pistol, but took care for the
future to keep in the background. Two or three men, from time to time took
opportunities of intruding themselves, but at last, having ordered the horseman
to be ready for an early start, we succeeded in shutting ourselves up for the
night. Before doing so, however, Moore went outside, fired off the five barrels
of his revolver in rapid succession, and then ostentatiously reloaded it — a
demonstration which produced for the time all its intended effect, for, although
sounds of talking and wrangling were audible, we were free from further
annoyance. 

*July 19th.* — After the turn things had taken on the previous evening, we made
up our minds that we could scarcely expect to get away without a dispute, and we
held ourselves in readiness for what might occur. We were up early, and found,
to our disgust, that it was raining heavily. Presently the horseman appeared,
and announced that he could not get a second horse, and that we must hire
porters to carry part of our baggage. Unwilling to place our power of effecting
a start at the mercy of Jibiani men, as we must have done had we consented to
this proposition, we determined to carry the extra saddlebags on our own
shoulders. It was now suggested that we might get back the tent-pole by a small
payment; the old story of the London dog-stealer was reproduced, and we were
asked to believe that it had been found by a native of the next hamlet,
Tschubiani, who would be happy to restore it, for a consideration. We consented
to place the sum demanded in the hands of the horseman, the only one of the
crowd over whom we had any hold, and, after some parley and delay, the missing
stick was returned. Meanwhile we were assailed on all sides by clamours for
money: one man wanted a ridiculous sum for some loaves he had brought us,
another asked their weight in Russian paper for his eggs, a third had a large
bill for firewood, and the master of the barn required an extortionate price for
our lodging. Some of these demands we resisted, others we partly conceded — at
the same time finishing as quickly as possible the packing of our saddlebags,
and taking care to keep them under our eyes.

The conduct of our horseman caused us much uneasiness, as he refused to put our
luggage on the horse, pretending that the villagers would not allow him to do so
until we had yielded to their claims. At last, chiefly by our own exertions, the
horse was loaded, and then, having paid everyone who had any fair claim, we
agreed to make a decided effort to start. One of us was to lead the horse, for
it was evident its master could not be relied on; the others were to carry
saddlebags, and keep together as much as possible. Lifting our luggage on our
shoulders, we prepared to leave the barn in a body, but our two men foolishly
loitered, to make sure that nothing was left behind. The natives took advantage
of the blunder, and immediately shut them in: looking round, we saw the state of
the case, and ran a tilt, with our ice-axes, at the wooden doors, which were
rudely constructed, divided in the middle, and opened inwards; the blow sent
them flying back at once. Francois, who was close by inside, endeavoured to come
out, when a peasant put himself in the way; but I suddenly brought the cold
barrel of my revolver into contact with the scoundrel’s cheek, on which he
retreated hastily. Francois escaped, and Paul was allowed to follow him. Once
more united, and forming a kind of square, with the horse in the centre, our
saddlebags on our shoulders, and our revolvers in our hands, we descended into
the hollow lane which led out of the village. Some of the inhabitants, yelling
and jabbering, jumped down in front to bar the way; others brandished swords,
daggers, and pistols on either wall; a few ran off, making signs that they would
fetch their guns; while the women, screaming and endeavouring to restrain the
fury of their relations, added by their wild cries and gestures to the confusion
of the scene.

Whether their interference was due to any kindly feeling towards us, or to a
fear lest our revolvers should make victims of their friends, we never knew. The
crisis was really serious, and a peaceful solution seemed almost hopeless, when
a trifling demand, screamed out by a man on the right-hand wall, suggested to us
an imitation of our predecessor Jason’s policy in the same country. We scattered
our dragon’s-teeth, in the shape of two or three small copeck-pieces, among the
group, and our foes began to scramble and squabble; their attention being for a
moment diverted, we pushed on as rapidly as possible, and before they had
recovered their surprise at our sudden move, were clear of the village. A
portion of the crowd came in pursuit, but two of us faced round in the narrow
path, and brought them to a halt until the horse had gained a slight start, when
we followed it. We passed hurriedly through Tschubiani, where most of the
inhabitants seemed to be out, or amongst the Jibiani crowd. The owner of the
horse had rendered us no assistance, and was now loitering somewhere out of
sight; the villagers, who followed us, motioned us to halt, but we kept straight
on, and having crossed the bridge, passed underneath the houses of Murkmer, and
along the bank of the stream. We were row in open country, and might consider
ourselves fairly out of the clutches of the men of Jibiani. Paul told us, that
when he was released from the barn, the villagers said to him, ❛If it was not
for those wonderful pistols of yours, we would have tied you all up, and taken
everything you had,❜ and there is no doubt that our revolvers alone saved us
from open robbery. The knowledge that you have fifteen barrels at your disposal
has a moral effect even on the most barbarous race. The difficulty lies in
enforcing the impression while keeping clear of actual fighting. Had a shot been
fired, we must inevitably have lost our luggage, and, considering the odds
against us, might have had great difficulty in effecting our own escape.

The horseman now came up, of course professing entire ignorance and innocence as
to the whole proceedings. With him were two natives of Davkar, a lower village,
who had volunteered to carry our saddlebags; but the sum they asked was so
ridiculous, that we had declined their services. Now they would have been very
glad to relieve us of our loads for a quarter of the payment previously
demanded.

Near Murkmer there is a good deal of cultivated ground, but the valley soon
narrows into a defile, and the wellbeaten path attains a great height on its
northern side, The loose soil of the mountain-slopes has been worn by the
spring-torrents into deep gullies, out of, or round, which we were frequently
forced to make long ascents or circuits. The scenery gradually improved, and,
although no snowy ranges were in sight, the clumps of fir and other trees which
dotted the sides of the gorge, and the frequent bends in the deep bed of the
stream, combined to form a varied and interesting series of landscapes. The rain
of the early morning had ceased, and the sun now shone out hotly between the
clouds, lighting up the long reaches of the Ingur, which wound along the bottom
of the green gorge. The second group of villages, known collectively as Kal, now
appeared before us, built on opposite hillsides, above the junction of a
northern tributary with the glen of the Ingur. The towers were not quite so
numerous as at Uschkul, but were still sufficiently so to give each knot of
habitations the appearance of a castle rather than of a village.

On the further side of the valley we noticed a solitary building, which is
called on the Five Verst Map a monastery, but we could obtain no certain
information about it through Paul, and it was too far out of the way to visit.
The nearest hamlet, Davkar, was situated at the foot of the hill on the banks of
the river, and we had to make a long descent to reach it. Here our horse man
lived, and we hoped by his aid to obtain a second horse to carry on our goods.
Having eaten our lunch in a barn similar to our late lodging, we commenced
negotiations for our further journey; but though there are plenty of horses in
the country, they had all been sent to the upper pastures, and there was not one
to be found. Two men, however, were ready to carry the load between them, and we
should have had little difficulty in settling terms but for the interference of
the horseman. He caused a hitch in the arrangement, and, when we told him to
stand aside, snatched his old flint-and-steel pistol from his belt, and
brandished it in our faces. Finding that his conduct provoked more laughter than
fear, and not exactly knowing what to do with his weapon, he walked off in a
huff. There were only about a dozen people in the hamlet, so there was no risk
of a row; but we were in considerable difficulty as to how to get forward, and
were obliged to condescend to cajole Islam back into a good humour. This Moore
successfully effected, and we concluded an agreement that we should be taken in
three days to Pari, and should employ two porters until a second horse was met
with.

We were surprised to hear that the direct path down the glen of the Ingur was
impassable for horses, and that we must mount the valley of the Kalde-Tshalai,
opening behind the village, to its head, and then cross a pass to Adisch; but as
this route promised to fulfil our purpose of seeing as much as possible of the
country, we made no objection to its adoption. The natives proposed to start at
once, and spend the night near the head of the valley, where they knew of a
shelter. We willingly agreed, and, about 3.30 P.M., again set out, to reclimb
the steep path we had descended to reach Davkar, until a grassy brow was gained,
high above the junction of the valleys. Here the paths forked, and we followed
the one which mounted beside the Kalde-Tshalai. The scenery of the lateral glen,
which runs due north towards the base of the snowy chain, is very grand, the
torrent flowing in a deep channel between precipitous walls of rock. At one spot
a bridge leaps boldly from side to side; at another, two streams fall showers of
spray into the bottom of the cleft.

Our men did not take us across the bridge to Agran, a village on the opposite
slope, probably to avoid any chance of a disagreeable encounter; for they asked
Paul not to mention where they came from if we met any villagers, as the
relations of Davkar and Agran were not friendly. We kept up along an ill-marked
track until, above the gorge, the remains of a winter avalanche bridged the
torrent, and enabled us to join the more beaten path on the opposite side of the
valley. The glen widens out near its head, and the pasturages are strewn with
granite boulders, transported by ice or water from the central chain. A small
ruined tower appeared before us, and was pointed out as our resting-place for
the night, and a recess in the hillside on the east marked the course by which a
pass practicable for horses leads directly to Jibiani. The large Giroscho
glacier pushed its terminal moraine far down into the head of the valley, and we
could see through the clouds that the mountain-wall rose precipitously above it.
The tower housed our men; we preferred to pitch our tent under the shelter of a
low stone wall by which it was surrounded.

*July 20th.* — The morning was fine, and only a few fleecy vapours hung upon the
range at the head of the valley. The cliffs above the Goroscho glacier are very
similar in character to those which overhang its next neighbour on the east, the
Nuamquam, but the shapes of the peaks which crown them are even more varied and
picturesque. The lower portion of the glacier is level, but its upper snows
descend in torn and tangled networks of towers and crevasses, which offer little
temptation to an assault. Nowhere in the Alps have I seen any barrier which
approaches the apparent impracticability of this portion of the central ridge of
the Cancasus; between Tau Tötönal and the sources of the Ingur its magnificence
can scarcely be overrated. The ease of our start, and the absence of any crowd
of greedy peasants, was a pleasant change from the annoyances of the previous
day. Our course was clear enough; a double track, which showed that the
Suanetians drag sledges over the pass, ascended, in well-turned zigzags, the
flowery slopes of the ridge, known by the unpronounceable name of Dschkjiimer,
which separates the Kalde and Adisch valleys. Like most mountain walks, the
ascent is divided into three stages — a steep climb, then a gentle rise over
shelving pasturages, followed by a short pull up to the final ridge

It took us two hours to reach the top of the pass from the tower. During the
last few minutes of the ascent, an apparently lofty snow-peak showed just enough
of its head, over the bank we were climbing, to stimulate our curiosity, but in
no way prepared us for the magnificent scene which burst into view from the
summit. The first thing which fixed our attention was the icefall of the Adisch
glacier.^[^1000]^ Unlike the glaciers supplying the two eastern sources of the Ingur,
which are fed only by the snow lodged on shelves of the cliffs that surround
them, the Adisch glacier is the outflow of large reservoirs of frozen snow,
invisible from below, and lying at the back of the line of precipitous peaks we
had been gazing up at with so much awe and admiration for the last two days.

Over a break in the battlements of this mountain-wall, the ice pours down into
the bottom of the Adisch valley, in a fall which, for its height, breadth, and
purity, exceeded anything we had seen elsewhere, either in the Alps or the
Caucasus. We estimated the height of the frozen cascade at 4,000 feet, or little
more than that of the Karagam glacier, up which we had forced our way; but the
fall now before us was far more broken, and, in our judgment, absolutely
impracticable. From side to side stretched deep-blue chasms, the space between
them filled up by a very maze of tottering pinnacles and moated towers. The
whole surface was of dazzling whiteness, similar to that of the Rosenlaui
glacier, before, disgusted by being treated as a grotto by troops of tourists,
it withdrew to the upper world. At the foot of the fall the glacier re-makes
itself, and spreads out, with a crimpled but otherwise unbroken surface, into a
fanlike tail, the symmetry of which is slightly marred by a projecting hillside.
By some strange mistake, the Five Verst Map marks a known pass straight up the
centre of the icefall!

Two mountains, worthy of their post, stand like giant sentinels to guard either
side of this crystal staircase, let down to common earth from the ❛shining
tablelands,❜ untrodden as yet by human foot, which lie in the heart of the
Koschtantau group. On the west is Tau Tötönal, an elegant snow pyramid, resting
on a broad rocky base; on the east is a rock-peak of somewhat inferior height,
but of bolder form. Behind us the Giroscho glacier, at the foot of which we had
slept, and the battlemented wall, which stretches away to the eastern source of
the Ingur, were still visible. In the glen at our feet, which ran nearly
south-west, we could see the towers of Adisch, and we were high enough to
command a wide view over the densely-forested ridges of Western Suanetia, to the
mountain ranges that encompass it. Had it not been for the clouds, which
persisted in haunting us, we must have seen Uschba, and it would be worth the
while of any future traveller to examine carefully the horizon in this
direction, and make sure whether the dome of Elbruz does not appear above the
main chain.

We had followed in the ascent, and now overtook two peasants, a man and woman,
who were on their way to Adisch. The man was inclined to be sociable, and was
greatly delighted by being allowed to look at the view through our
field-glasses. In return we examined his gun, the barrel of which was very long
and elaborately ornamented. It was arranged that the woman should descend to
Adisch by a short cut, and tell the people there to begin baking some bread for
us, in order that we might not have so long to wait for our midday meal. A
capital path bearing towards, and consequently affording a constant view of, the
glacier, led down into the valley. We followed it across a mountain-side,
spotted with the large creamcoloured blossoms of Caucasian rhododendron, which
gave place lower down to birch-bushes. We found the torrent too strong to be
easily forded, but the friendly native, to whom we had talked on the top, had
hurried down before us, and caught one of the horses grazing near at hand, on
which each of us in turn rode across behind him. The fall of the glen was very
gradual, but a bend to the west soon hid the glacier, and there was for some
distance little to remark in the features of the surrounding scenery. The first
habitation we came upon was a solitary tower, from which a similar one was
visible on the crest of the ridge we had crossed; and it struck us as extremely
probable that the ruined building we had camped beside was one of a chain of
towers, which had served in olden times as beacons, or fire-telegraphs, from
valley to valley. On the opposite side of the stream scattered trees made their
appearance, and our attention was attracted to a deep hollow, or cut, in the
ground, such as is called a ❛graben❜ in the German Alps, where, owing to the
friable nature of the soil, the rains have washed away the surface and laid bare
the skeleton of the mountain. Large herds of horses and oxen were feeding on the
grass-slopes on the right bank of the torrent. Adisch, which had been hidden for
some time, came suddenly into view round a corner, finely situated on the
sloping hillside, at some height above the bottom of the valley, beside a
torrent descending from the snowy spurs of Tau Tötönal, a glimpse of which is
the only hint of the nearness of a mighty mountain-chain.

We had outwalked our men and the luggage, and sat down to wait for them on a
knoll opposite the village, which consisted, as usual, of a cluster of square
stone houses, interspersed and surrounded by towers, many of which were in
ruins. By the time Paul cane up we were surrounded by an excited circle of
juveniles, to whom our equipments were as marvellous and entertaining as a
conjuror’s box. Our boots were perhaps the greatest source of amusement, and the
children were never tired of attempting to count the number of nails in them.
Entering the village, we were led through it to a house at the farther end,
where we were invited to sit down on some logs of wood, under the shelter of a
projecting balcony, which was very convenient, as a heavy shower had just
commenced. Paul went into the house to see how the baking was getting on, whilst
we did our best to entertain and cultivate friendly relations with the crowd
which, as a matter of course, gathered round us.

We thought the Adischers, as a race, more intelligent in their looks than our
late hosts of Jibiani, and ❛their manner in dealing with strangers❜ was
certainly less disagreeable. They did not, however, inspire us with the amount
of confidence requisite to induce us to use their village as a base for the
attack of Tau Tötönal, and to leave our luggage at their mercy during our
absence. From the character we afterwards found them to deserve, our caution was
fortunate. We were obliged occasionally to ask the crowd to leave us a little
breathing room, but they quite took the point of the suggestion, that the wider
the circle the more would be able to see, and both parties were perfectly
good-humoured. Paul’s appearance with the first batch of haves was greeted with
enthusiasm, for the rations served out at breakfast had been scanty, and we were
all ravenous. The flat unleavened cakes of the Caucasus are very palatable when
hot, and have the advantage of being seldom sour, like the detestable black
bread common in Russia. On the present occasion we made short work of the first
baking, and were perfectly ready for a second supply of a superior character,
with a layer of warm cheese in the centre, very nice and indigestible.

When the time for payment came there was of course a difficulty, or would have
been one, had we not preferred to pay three times their value for the loaves we
had consumed, rather than engage in another dispute. It did not seem to us a
case where, in the interest of future travellers, we were bound to resist
extortion; and we preferred laying ourselves open to the ordinary charge against
Englishmen of raising prices wherever they go, to running the risk of being
stuck by the dagger of an indignant Adischer for the sum of sixpence. Despite,
however, our peace-at-any-price policy, we were followed out of the village by
one man, with an absurd demand, to which we refused to listen.

The valley of the Adisch-Tshalai below the village is contracted to a mere
gorge, the sides of which are rugged, broken, and picturesquely wooded with
firs, pines, birch, and ash. The track which leads from the upper glen to the
lowervalleys makes a very long and steep ascent, in order to avoid the circuits
that would otherwise be necessary to cross lateral ravines. A characteristic of
the paths running parallel to the course of the Ingur, from the upper to the
lower end of Suanetia, is that they are always uphill; at least, the ascents are
so numerous and long, that at the end of the day, the impression left on the
mind of the traveller by the intervening descents is almost effaced. The track,
passable for sledges, along which we were now strolling, in the wake of our
baggage-horse, rises steadily towards a solitary tree which stands up as a
beacon on a projecting brow, marking the limit of the forest, and the point at
which a sudden sweep must be made to the right, to avoid a series of deeply-cut
water-channels, which fall into the gorge of the Adisch-Tshalai. From hence we
could see, in the distance, the hamlet of Suni, one of the community of Tzurim,
the resting-place for the night chosen by our horseman and porters. It was
perched on a meadow-terrace, high above the junction of the Adisch-Tshalai and
the Ingur, both of which flow through deep wooded gorges. In this direction the
distant view was closed by the snowy heads of the Leila range.

Still maintaining our height, we wound above the heads of the ravines, until we
found ourselves on the watershed between the northern district of Mushalaliz,
the largest and most thickly-populated of all the Suanetian valleys, and the
glens of the Adisch-Tshalai and Ingur, on the south. The ridge separating the
two basins sank at our feet into a densely-wooded brow, broken away into
precipitous ravines on the south, but falling more gently towards Mushalaliz on
the opposite side. Several miles further west the ridge again rose into
gracefully sloped eminences, before it finally sank down to the bed of the Ingur
at Latal, where the Mushalaliz torrent joins the main stream. The distant
summits of the Leila, with their foreground of wooded gorges and village-dotted
slopes, formed a landscape which anywhere else would have absorbed our
attention: but we were now more anxious minutely to examine the details of the
main chain, which swept round the northern side of the Mushalaliz valley, a
broad green expanse relieved by the white towers of many villages. Two large
ice-streams filled deep trenches in the mountains, and terminated amongst the
lofty cliffs, which close abruptly the head of the valley. The lower portion of
the western glacier presents a flat dirty surface, and is fed by two large
icefalls, the origin of which was lost in cloud; the second slides out a long
twisting tongue of ice, which descends below the level of the forest.

We now followed the top of the wooded brow. The combination of an exquisite
woodland foreground with varied and magnificent distant views rendered this
portion of our day’s journey the most lovely walk we had ever taken. It is quite
impossible to convey in words any idea of the beauty of the landscape, or the
grandeur of scale which placed the scenery beyond comparison with any of the
show-sights of Switzerland. Woods of ash, hazel, and fir alternated with
coppices of laurel, white rhododendron, and yellow azaleas, the scent of which
perfumed the air. Tall tiger-lilies, one of the characteristic flowers of the
Caucasus, shot up their tawny spikes through the rich herbage, while dark-blue
lupins and hollyhocks challenged their supremacy over the humbler flowers —
campanulas, bluebells, and cowslips — which carpeted the ground. Every break in
the wood afforded a glimpse, now over the pine-fringed gorges to the
white-crested Leila mountains, now down upon the green Mushalaliz, with its
sparkling stream and castellated hamlets, and across it to the peaks,
precipices, and glaciers of the central chain. We wandered on, feeling as if we
had broken in on enchanted ground, and that it was all too beautiful to be real.
The nature of the path did not disturb the even tenor of our thoughts; its
makers, with remarkable ingenuity, had carried it first on one, then on the
other, side of the brow, and it was for a long time almost level and free from
stones. At length it turned down the northern side of the ridge, as if to
descend to Mushalaliz; but, desirous of gaining Suni,^[^1001]^ in the other valley, we
plunged, under the guidance of our porters, into the thickets, and soon hit
another track remounting to the left.

Just below the watershed a clear little tarn nestled among the trees. We crossed
several wooded spurs before we reached the verge of the meadows on which Suni is
built. The views, looking back towards Tau Tötönal and up the valley of the
Adisch-Tshalai, were wonderfully fine, their effect being heightened by the
rapid sweep of afternoon rain-clouds across the sky, and the bright gleams of
sunshine which shone out between them. Just before emerging from the wood the
horse slipped on a miry bank, where the rains had carried away the path, and
fell several feet into a sort of slime-pit. Happily, he neither damaged himself
nor the saddlebags, beyond covering both with mud. The fields around Suni are
more like Alpine meadows than is usual in this country; they are carefully
irrigated by a system of water-channels; and have fenced off from the surrounding
pasturages. There are fewer towers here than in the upper villages, and the
population is in appearance more like that of the Rion valley. The character
they bear is not quite so bad as that of their neighbours of the upper glens,
but they seem to lead the same violent quarrelsome life, full of petty
squabbles, in which it is perhaps difficult to draw the line between war and
murder.

We had eagerly caught at the proposal that we should seek lodgings with a
priest, but his house was shut up and deserted, and we were taken on to a
neighbouring cottage. The first room offered to us was large, gloomy, and
stablelike; when our eyes grew accustomed to the darkness, we found that the
furniture consisted of two or three curiously-carved armchairs, of the broad and
shallow shape common in the Caucasus, and a hay-bed covered with some cloths of
very decided uncleanliness. Mysterious sounds issued from one corner of the
apartment, occupied by a row of wooden hutches, also a good deal carved. They
proved to be occupied by an old sow, whose dwelling we were to have the honour
of sharing. Thinking we might go further and fave better, we asked what was
above the pigstye, and found a hay-barn, clean, and, if draughty, at least free
from the stifling atmosphere which had driven us from below. Here we took up our
quarters and spent the night, sleeping on the hay.

*July 21st.* — The first matter which required our attention was the
reorganisation of our baggage-train. The two Davkar porters, who had carried
heavy loads, and walked fairly well, did not care to go further from home
without an increase in the rate of pay, and the master of the house seemed
desirous to supply a second horse and come with us. As a matter of course, when
the arrangement was, as we thought, concluded, the fellow struck to see if he
could not get more; but we finally succeeded in settling the business, paid off
the porters, and started afresh with our new companion. The weather was still
the same — hot gleams of sunshine alternating with sharp showers — but to-day
the sunshine predominated. The distance in o straight line from Suni to the next
group of villages is mot great, but we were two hours traversing it, partly
owing to the immense circuits made by the path round lateral ravines; it is
compelled to keep at a high level on the rugged hillside, as the bottom of the
glen is only wide enough for the Ingur, which flows for miles through a gorge
clothed by thick pine-forests. The chief cause, however, of our slow progress
during this and the succeeding day was the absurd behaviour of our two horsemen,
who dawdled along at their horses’ heads at a pace of scarcely two miles an
hour, and resented the remonstrances made by Paul to the extent of drawing their
pistols on him.

The position of the hamlets constituting El is picturesque; they stand at
different heights on a sunny slope, which fulls into the gorge of the Ingur from
the wooded crest of the ridge dividing it from the Mushalaliz valley. They are
surrounded by fields, and the products of the soil — hemp, Indian corn, and
various kinds of grain — showed that we were gradually approaching a milder
climate. We descended (I believe unnecessarily) in order to pass through a lower
hamlet, at which one of our horsemen had a message to leave, and then faced a
steep and apparently interminable climb, through a beautiful forest, thick
enough to shut out all but occasional glimpses into the bed of the Ingur. The
only new feature in the foliage was the prevalence of pines,^[^1002]^ which are seldom
found near the heads of the Caucasian valleys. Numerous sledge-tracks branched
off up the hill, and fear of missing the way obliged us to keep close company
with our sluggish horsemen.

At last, when we had all begun to grumble at the toil and trouble of descending
a Suanetian valley by a succession of climbs of 2,000 feet each, we came upon a
glade in the wood, evidently a favourite halting-ground with the peasants of the
neighbouring villages. A fringe of pines and birches surrounded the level plot
of smooth greensward and screened off the hot sun, the perfume of azaleas filled
the air, and the eyes rested on the noble picture made by the deep pine-clad
gorge beneath, and the central mass of the Leila chain divectly opposite us.
❛Three silent pinnacles of aged snow❜ sent down long snake-like glaciers towards
the Ingur, one of them being a remarkable specimen of what is technically known
as a ❛glacier remanié.❜ A wall of rock lying across its path scotches but cannot
kill the glacier-snake; as the ice slides steadily downwards, masses fall over
the cliff in the form of avalanches, and form a fresh glacier below, which
creeps down some distance further towards the forests. A thick girdle of pines
clothed the lower slopes, which are broken by rocky spurs dividing the beds of
the several glacier-fed torrents. For once we were glad to see the horsemen halt
and unload their animals. A fire was soon lighted with moss and pinechips, and
Paul and Francois busied themselves cooking ❛kabobs,❜ while we reclined on the
turf, regarding the mountain-tops, more, I fear, in the spirit of lotos-eaters
than in that befitting members of the Alpine Club. Undoubtedly the difficulties
of everyday travel in the Caucasus exhaust much of that energy which finds vent
in Switzerland in sealing the highest peaks, but even in the Alps there are
moments when it is pleasant 

:::: { .margin-left-xl .fs-xs }
❛To watch the long bright river drawing slowly<br />
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;His waters from the purple hill.❜ 
::::

without any thoughts of scaling the silent pinnacles in the distance.

When the time came to pursue our journey, we bade a lingering farewell to the
lovely glade, and surrendered ourselves again to the annoyances of everyday
life, and the penance of accommodating our movements to the pace of our
horsemen. After winding now up, now down, through the forest, we came suddenly
on open hayfields, in the midst of which rose a group of towers, most of them in
ruins. Several of the houses were still inhabited, and a group of peasants —
all, as a matter of course, wearing daggers — were at work haymaking. They soon
gathered round us, and inspected with interest our revolvers and field-glasses;
so far as pantomime could carry it, our intercourse was of the most friendly
character. Our tail, which as usual we had left behind, came up, and the
horsemen seemed rather to look down Upon our new acquaintances, who, I suppose,
had not committed murders or robberies enough to entitle them to rank among the
upper classes of Suanetia.

Thus far we had been all day climbing round the irregularities of the steep
slope which forms the north side of the valley of the Ingur; now the path turned
over its summit, and began slowly to descend towards the torrent issuing from
the basin of Mushalaliz, which we had looked down upon the previous afternoon.
The last view of the Leila summits, before we lost them behind the ridge, was
exceedingly beautiful. We soon found ourselves in a fold of the hills,
surrounded by grassy eminences, which cut oft the view of the valley, but were
not high enough to shut out the snowy buttresses of Uschba and the summits near
it. Clouds hid the actual peaks, and prevented us from distinguishing their
forms or making any estimate of their height. We traversed a succession of
meadows alive with haymakers, and set in frames of hazel and birch copses,
through which we had occasionally to force our way, keeping close company with a
purling stream, the image of an English brook. This delightful scenery lasted
for a considerable space, as far as the verge of the descent to the Mushalaliz
torrent. Here we rested for some minutes under the shade of a beech-grove,
before running down the steep path, which bore obliquely along the hillside,
covered as usual with a thick mantle of greenery; the bay, the laburnum, and the
wild honeysuckle, now mingled with the shrubs of the higher regions — the
rhododendron and azalea — forming a dense underwood on either side of the way,
which was overshadowed by beeches and hazels.

A crazy but most picturesque bridge spans the narrow cleft in which flows the
stream issuing from the Mushalaliz. The Caucasian cattle have stronger nerves
than those of the Zillerthal, in the Tyrol, where a boarding is put up on one
side of any lofty bridge, lest a cow should be alarmed, or take a suicidal fancy
to leap into the foaming torrent. Here not only is there no railing, but
numerous holes are loft in the wooden framework of the floor, and it is
wonderful that the animals do not often break their legs. A slight rise on the
further side brought us to the level of the fertile strip of ground lying
between the Ingur and the northern slopes, on which are situated the hamlets of
the Latal community. The houses are scattered among the fields, and look less
like fortresses or dungeons than those of the upper valley; while the fields are
surrounded with neatly-woven fences and tall trees, amongst which we saw, for
the first time, walnuts growing in clumps by the side of the path. The height is
only 4,500 feet, and the produce of the fields and the abundance of fruit-trees
bear witness to a milder climate. Tobacco, Indian corn, millet, peas, and beans
are extensively cultivated, and the grass crops, which the peasants were now
busy mowing, seemed very rich. The people in the fields were a wild-looking
race, and the women had the rough inquisitiveness of savages. Francois’ personal
appearance seemed to take their fancy, but though flattered at their admiration,
he was not disposed to return it. We none of us lost our hearts to the female
portion of the population on the south of the Caucasus; the vaunted and
undoubted beauty of the Georgian race cannot withstand the exposure to weather,
and the field-work at an early age, which is the lot of the women of the
mountain tribes, and the traveller who wants to see the houris with whom popular
fancy peoples the country had better stay at Kutais or Tiflis. We passed through
several clusters of houses, and, having left behind us a knoll crowned by one of
the small square chapels characteristic of this region, were led by our horsemen
to an isolated farmhouse. The owner was out haymaking, and his wife, a hideous
old shrew, would not open the door to so large a party of strangers without
leave from her lord. After a long delay, during which we had nothing to do but
to watch the clumsy, heavily-laden carts, drawn by oxen, bringing in the hay, an
old peasant arrived, and we were admitted within the gates.

We found a regular farmyard, stocked with pigs and poultry, and guarded by a
dog. The building consisted of two or three rooms on the ground-floor, and a
large barn, full of new hay, which we appropriated to our use. A projecting
balcony afforded us a sunny spot on which to spread our mattrass, while waiting
the result of the always lengthy preparations for dinner. So peaceful aud
pastoral was the scene before our eyes, that it was difficult to realise how
many deeds of warfare and bloodshed had taken place here, even within the last
few years. The inhabitants of Latal were formerly engaged in constant struggles
against the Dadisch-Kilians, whose authority extended over the neighbouring
communities of Gegeri and Betscho on the west and north. Five years ago they
were at strife with the nearest village of the Lendjer group, in the Mushalaliz
valley. Herr Radde thus describes his reception at Latal, and the character he
heard of its inhabitants:—

❛We found shelter in the courtyard of an old Suanetian castle, with a friendly
priest who came from Imeritia, and had spent a year and a half as a missionary
amongst the Suanetians. He had brought his wife with him, and built himself a
small cottage in the inner court, which was surrounded by a high wall of
defence. The account he gave of the progress of God’s word among the Suanetians
was very disheartening. They are deaf, he said, to all instruction; only by
kindness can they in some degree be drawn towards it. They dread being subjected
to a conscription, and distrust all opportunities offered of bettering
themselves. Despite the frequent church-services, generally held here on
Saturdays and Sundays, they remain strangers to church principles. They show no
desire to allow their children to learn the Georgian language, although the
Government, partly by the appointed priest, partly by a school lately
established at Pari, has provided them the means of doing so. In Latal, as in
most of the villages of upper independent Suanetia, it is difficult to find a
man who has not committed one or more murders; for instance, two brothers, who
lived near the priest, were well known to have killed seven or eight Suanetians.
They were two hearty old men, with fearfully savage countenances. At night every
man drives his cattle into the courtyard, and carefully secures the great wooden
doors of the outside wall.❜ 

We witnessed an illustration of the practice last alluded to, in the return of
the cows shortly before sunset, and took care to secure draughts of fresh milk
as soon as possible. The arrival of strangers did not seem to surprise the
peasants here so much as in the upper villages, and we enjoyed comparative
privacy; although we heard afterwards, from Paul, that our real character was a
subject of deep discussion between our horsemen and our host’s family. We were
not exactly like Russians, and bore no resemblance to the only other class of
visitors with whom they were acquainted — the inhabitants of the north side of
the chain, who are said to cross here by the Thuber glacier, either on business
to dispose of their meychandise — iron, salt, and sheepskin cloaks — or
attracted by the apples and pears which abound in this neighbourhood. Altogether
they were fairly puzzled, until our Davkar horseman hit on a happy solution of
the mystery, and pronounced us to be, beyond doubt, wandering Jews, on the
ground of our not observing church-fasts.

As the evening closed in, the clouds melted away from the summits, and, to our
surprise, at the head of the Mushalaliz, Tau Tötönal shone out, a silvery spear,
poised at an amazing height in the air, the point of which flushed rosy as the
sun sank in the west. Immediately opposite us stood the glacier-crowned,
forest-girt Leila mountains, one of their summits curiously resembling in shape
Monte Rosa from the Gornergrat. It was one of those heavenly evenings which come
once or twice in a summer, when the whole atmosphere seems steeped in roses and
purples.

An hour after we had been lost in admiration of the sunset scene we were all
writhing in slow torments in the hayloft, devoured by hungry insects, and half
suffocated by smoke, which rose through the floor from the room underneath.

*July 22nd.* — The morning was cloudless, and the great white peal of Tau
Tötönal looked superb against the blue sky. When the time came for starting, the
old farmer, who had been our host, claimed an exorbitant recompense, We offered
him half as much again as was due, but he threw down the rouble-notes on the
floor with contempt. Taking no notice, we continued to load the horses, and,
after a good deal of bluster, he came to his senses. We amused ourselves at
parting by drawing out a British passport, a document certainly seen for the
first time in Suanetia, and bidding Paul tell him that he little thought whom he
had entertained unawares. The lion and the unicorn worked the effect intended,
and our host forgot his threats of not allowing us to leave till his demands
were satisfied to the full, and bade us farewell with an air of mingled fear and
relief.

:::: { .wrap-80 .caption }
![Tau Tötönal from above Latal.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0328.jpg "Tau Tötönal from above Latal."){#b328}
::::

The path down the Ingur has to cross another steep ridge to reach the next
basin, that of Betscho, watered by a torrent flowing due south from the central
chain. The climb up the hillside was hot and severe, past another hamlet of the
Latal group, clinging to a slope so steep that it looked as if the houses must
soon slip down and join their neighbours on the flat ground below. Above it the
path winds along the slopes, through young woods of beech, oak, hazel, and
aspen, until the summit of the spur separating Latal from Betscho is attained.
Just before reaching it we sat down to admire the outline of Tau Tötönal and the
southern face of the mountains above Jibiani, which had come into sight over the
lower ranges. Nearer, and scarcely less beautiful, the range of the Leila formed
a second picture, which elsewhere would have riveted the attention. A shout from
Moore, however, hurried me on to where he was sitting with Francois, 100 yards
in advance, apparently gazing in a state of astonishment, that for the moment
rendered them unable to express their feelings, at some castle in the air.

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption }
![Uschba from above Latal.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0329.jpg "Uschba from above Latal."){#b329}
::::

On reaching my companions I was at no loss to discover the cause of their
emotion. Due north, above the low wood of the adjoining hillside, shot up two
towers of rock, one slightly in advance of the other, forming, as regards
height, steepness, and outline, beyond all comparison the most wonderful
mountain mass we had ever beheld. Tier above tier of precipices rose straight up
from the valley, culminating in two tremendous towers, separated by a deep
depression. The twin summits resembled one another in form, and appeared to be
long roof-like ridges, falling away in slopes of mingled rock and ice of
terrific steepness. The idea of climbing either of them seemed too insane to be
so much as suggested, and even the lower spurs of the mountain above the meadows
of Betscho are so tremendous that it looked as if a stone dropped from the top
of either of the peaks would scarcely stop rolling before it reached the valley.
There was no mistake about it, the Caucasian Matterhorn was found at last, only
here we had one Matterhorn piled on another, and then multiplied by two. It was
a sensation scene of Nature’s own devising. The name of the mountain was unknown
to us at the time; it was unmarked on the map, and our horsemen were sulky and
uncommunicative. We learnt afterwards that it is generally called Uschba —
❛usch❜ in Georgian, means rain or storm, so that this seems to be a parallel
instance to the Swiss Wetterhorn. The two peaks also resemble one another in
being great promontories projecting from the main chain and immediately
overhanging the valleys at their feet, so that they are likely to be the heights
round which clouds first gather.

Our natural course was to descend as soon as possible to the Betscho-Tshalai,
and follow the main valley of the Ingur. Our horsemen, who were more
insufferably indolent and impudent than ever, refused to take a track leading
apparently in the right direction, and conducted us instead by a path up the
Betscho glen. The way was through a wood of copper-beech and aspen, where the
branches formed a frame to the majestic Uschba, whose base we were approaching.
The men had told us we should be in Pari by the middle of the day, and trusting
to their account we had not, as usual, brought provisions with us. Having
already been out three hours, and appearing by the map to be little nearer our
destination than at starting, we sent Paul into the nearest village to see if he
could get any bread; he succeeded in purchasing one loaf, which had a medicinal
taste, as if flavoured with castor-oil, and was only made eatable by extreme
hunger.

The villages of Betscho are castellated; one of them, the Mazer of the Five
Verst Map, is of large size, and looks very picturesque from a distance. Turning
at length down the glen, we retraced our steps at a lower level along the grassy
banks of the Betscho-Tshalai,^[^1003]^ until nearly opposite a hamlet named Doli, on the
right bank of the stream. to which we crossed by a good bridge. As long as we
were in the Betscho glen, the forest was still dense, and the foliage varied;
but when, after a tedious ascent, we rounded the brow that overlooks the
junction of the streams, and turned along the hillsides above the Ingur, the
character of the scenery underwent a sudden change. At the western extremity of
Suanetia the Ingur flows in a deep defile, between the projecting bases of the
main chain and the Leila mountains. All the villages are built at o height of
from 2,000 to 3,000 feet above the stream, on the northern slopes, which are
composed of a very friable slaty rock, in which every torrent has cut itself a
deep channel. The constantly-recurring necessity of making the circuits of these
ravines renders the walk from Deli to Pari extremely laborious.

The afternoon was hot, and the succession of hay and cornfields, dotted with
poor-looking stone houses, through which our road lay, was a bad exchange for
the timber to which we had become accustomed. The path climbed higher and
higher, till at last it crossed a bare slate-bank, which broke the uniformity of
the hillside, and gained a knoll, whence we looked across a wide and tolerably
level terrace, watered by a torrent and supporting several villages. Pari,
however, was not amongst them, and the meadows had to be crossed and a second
brow gained before the resting-place to which we had been looking forward for
the last few days came into sight. Between us and it was another deep ravine.
Two of the party tried a short cut, with the usual result, and reached the
torrent only after a stiff scramble through thickets which were very nearly
impassable. There was no bridge, and some waded through the water, while others
rode over on one of the horses. Close to the torrent a ferruginous mineral
spring, slightly effervescent and very palatable, bursts from the ground.

A last ascent brought us up again to the level of Pari, and we reached the
hamlet — for it is nothing more — tired and hungry, about 4.30 P.M. Its position
is surpassed in beauty by many of the villages we had lately rested in. The
Ingur flows out of sight at the bottom of a deep gorge, and the hillside on
which Pari stands is capped by rocky summits little exceeding the snow-level.
The horizon is formed on the west by a long spur of the main chain, which runs
out at right-angles from it, and forms on this side the boundary of Suanetia;
between its lower slopes and the final spurs of the Leila, the Ingur finds its
way out to the low country through a deep and densely-wooded gorge. The first
building in the hamlet was a whitewashed house, built in the manner of ordinary
civilised dwellings, with a little garden at the back. A hundred yards farther
we came to an open space surrounded on three sides by buildings, and on the
fourth by the ruinous and blackened walls of the late residence of Constantin
Dadisch-Kilian, the native prince who, as has been before related, some eight
years ago murdered the Governor of Mingrelia at Kutais. The village is composed
chiefly of mean-looking cottages, without the tall towers of defence
characteristic of Free Suanetia. We told our horseman to take us to the quarters
of the Russian cossacks who, since the crime of Constantin and the confiscation
of his property, have been stationed here to keep a watch over the district. The
full force consists only of ten men, and is of course too small to preserve
order except in the immediate neighbourhood, where the power which they merely
represent has been once felt, and is now better appreciated.

Herr Radde’s account of the policy adopted by the Russian Government towards the
wild mountaineers of Suanetia is very curious. ❛It is remarkable,❜ writes the
Herr, ❛how here too the Government deals on a policy of mildness with the
wildest mountain-tribes. When it is borne in mind that Free Suanetia contains o
thousand armed men, there can be no doubt to what issue energetic measures would
lead. It is only by patient persuasion, and an avoidance of all
misunderstandings, that the government can be carried on in outlying districts.
With such obstacles to contend with, the results must necessarily be slow, but
they have more certain than those an energetic military discipline would produce.
The upper valley of the Ingur is incapable of maintaining a great military
force, and the natural difficulties which here oppose the transport of food and
ammunition would render its maintenance exceedingly costly. For what good end
would a military force keep in subjection the neglected but conquered
Suanetians? Murder would not be prevented, agriculture or cattle-breeding
encouraged. The perseverance and tenacity with which the Government adheres to
its principles must in time tame these wild Suanetians, They will by degrees
adopt the Georgian faith and language, and accustom themselves to a more
peaceable existence.❜ 

How much of the mildness of their rulers the people owe to the military
difficulties mentioned above, and how much to the real belief of Russian
officials in a conciliatory policy, it would perhaps be unkind to enquire. Paul
told us that at one time the Government had collected a small house-tax from the
Suanetians, but for the last year or two they have been relieved from even this
slight mark of subjection. Arrived at the Cossacks’ quarters, we rejected the
officiousness of our Davkar horseman, who now strove to render himself
important, and sent Paul to represent who we were and what we wanted. The chief
of the outpost was away, but his place was filled by a very civil fellow, who at
once found us lodging in the now confiscated dwelling-house of one of the native
princes.

Our rooms were on the first-floor, which was approached by an outside staircase.
The skill in wood-carving common to so many mountain populations was conspicuous
here, in the elaborate ornamentation of the roof of the principal apartment, and
of the spacious balcony which was our favourite lounge. Our lodgings were quite
bare, but a fireplace gave our men the necessary facilities for cooking.

Nothing could exceed the kindness and readiness to meet our wants shown by the
Cossacks, and we rejoiced in our deliverance for a time from the constant
struggle with the barbarous natives. When our Davkar horseman came to be paid,
he had the impudence to ask for a present, a demand which we promptly crushed by
threatening to inform the Cossacks that he had drawn a pistol on us. No more was
heard of one of the greatest scoundrels we ever had to deal with, and he left
the village soon afterwards. We slept as usual on our mattrass, but with a
pleasant sense of security which had been wanting since our arrival at Jibiani.

*July 23rd.* — The day was spent in idleness, while collecting information and
preparing provisions for our further journey. We had now reached a point due
south of Elbruz; it was therefore necessary to turn north, and cross the main
chain, in order to reach the foot of the great mountain. We had been unable,
either at Tiflis or Kutais, to obtain any information as to the passes leading
from Suanetia to the northern valleys, and were naturally anxious to learn the
character of the difficulties we might expect in completing the only link now
wanting in our mountain route from Kazbek to Elbruz. The Cossacks told us that
there were two passes used by the people, and practicable for cattle, though too
rough for horses. The one they recommended us to take leads from the head of a
glen called Nakra, which joins the Ingur valley below Pari, and we were told
that by this pass Uraspieh, the chief village of the Upper Baksan, could be
reached in three days. The usual need of porters arose, but the chief Cossack
undertook to find some for us, and shortly introduced two pleasant-looking men,
with whom we made an agreement that they, with five friends, should carry our
baggage to Urnspieh for six roubles (seventeen shillings) apiece. A man was
sent up to the pasturages to buy us a sheep, for the price of which our provider
the Cossack apologised, alleging as its cause the rapacity of the villagers,
which made living at Pari exceedingly dear. There was no shop in the Suanetian
capital, where wine, sugar, and butter are unknown luxuries, but we laid in a
store of what provisions we could set hands on. Our hopes of honey, a dainty for
which the district is celebrated, and which it exports to the neighbouring
provinces, though long deferred, were finally fulfilled. During the day we
devoted much thought to the subject of dinner. Moore’s hungry eye having
observed an old pig with a large young family, he prevailed on Paul to procure
the slaughter of two of the innocents, and we looked forward to them as a
welcome relief to a long course of tough mutton and tougher fowls.
Notwithstanding the unusual appliances at Paul’s disposal, the dish was not a
success.

My friends varied their amusements by taking a Russian steam-bath, in a little
building, specially constructed for the purpose, opposite our house. What
tortures they underwent I never clearly learnt, but they came out looking
half-boiled and as red as lobsters. A considerable fire is necessary to heat the
building, and as large logs are scarce and dear at Pari, owing to the imperfect
means of transport, although the forests are barely three hours distant, all the
Cossacks got a steam afterwards, and were clad thus to enjoy their sole luxury
at our expense.

:::



#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1000]: [Radde mentions a second name, Gatuntau glacier. Is not Gatuntau a corruption of Koschtantau, and do not the snowfields which feed the icefall surround the base of Koschtantau? These are questions for an explorer. The Russian engineers gave up this part of the chain as a bad job, and the Five Verst Map is quite unintelligible.]{.footnote}

[^1001]: [Spelt thus on the map, but generally pronounced Suréni.]{.footnote}

[^1002]: [Pinus sylvestris, Abies Nordmanniana, and Abies orientalis are, according to Radde, found in the Suanetian forests.]{.footnote}

[^1003]: [Called Dodra by the people of Pari.]{.footnote}

