# CHAPTER XI.<br /><small> FROM PARI TO PÄTIGORSK, AND ASCENT OF ELBRUZ. </small>{#eleven .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
A Captive Bear - Moore Harangues the Porters — Camp in the Forest — A Plague of
Flies — Lazy Porters — A Nook in the Mountains — Cattle Lifting — Across the
Chain in a Snowstorm — A Stormy Debate — A Log Hut — Baksan Valley — Uruspieh —
The Guest House — Villany Rewarded — Minghi-Tau — An Idle Day — An Enlightened
Prince — Passes to the Kuratchai — Tartar Mountaineers — A Night with the
Shepherds — A Steep Climb — Camp on the Rocks — Great Cold — On the Snowfield —
In a Crevasse — Frigid Despair — A Crisis — Perseverance Rewarded — The Summit —
Panorama — The Return —Enthusiastic Reeeption — The Lower Baksan — A Long Ride —
A Tcherkess Village — Grassy Downs —  Zonitzki — Patigorsk.
<br /><br />
::::

*July 24th.* — It is not such an easy matter in the Caucasus as in Switzerland
to start in the morning at the hour fixed overnight. Our new troop of porters
had to be gathered together from their respective abodes, and each article of
the luggage lifted, in order to test its weight, before the business of
arranging the burdens could proceed. More than half was placed on the back of a
ridiculously small donkey, a meek-looking specimen of his race, with long ears
given to flap uncertainly backwards and forwards. This animal was to accompany
us for some hours, to relieve our porters of a portion of their burden.

On parting we presented the chief Cossack with an English knife, with which he
was very much pleased, and we had consequently to submit to a repetition of the
hugging and kissing business so popular abroad, and particularly in Russia, but
which is not appreciated by the reserved and unsympathetic Anglo-Saxon. Bidding
farewell to the kindly Cossacks, we took a path which connects Pari with the few
villages to the west — the last in Suanetia, above the defile of the Ingur.
These, like the capital, are built on terraces, high above the river, and
separated from one another by deep and broad ravines. A description of the
details of our morning’s wall would be nearly as wearisome as was the reality;
there was little change in the character of the views, and our time was chiefly
spent in going down and up steep zigzags. So great were the circuits we were
obliged to make, and so dawdling were our porters, that it was time for a midday
halt before we reached the last hamlet built on the southern slope of the spur
that projects on the eastern side of the entrance to the Nakra valley. We sat
down under the shade of a large tree, above the houses, from which the villagers
soon crowded round us; with them came a small bear, led by a troop of boys, who
cuffed and dragged about poor Bruin very mercilessly. A short and gentle ascent
over rich meadows brought us to the top of the spur, whence there was a fine
view. At a great depth beneath us lay the glen of the Nakra, backed by
snow-streaked ranges, and clothed with the finest pine-forests we had yet seen.
The single trees were magnificent, and, standing some distance apart, rose above
the other foliage in distinct dark-green cones. The scene strongly resembled
some represented in photographs of the Himalayas, and was exceedingly striking.
Turning southward, we had before us the deep cleft in the hills which forms the
gate of Suanetia, and affords an outlet to the river and the road to Sugdidi, a
small Abkasian town, halfway between Kutais and Soukhoum-Kalé.

Our Pari porters showed so strong a disposition to walk in the ways of the men
of Davkar — that is, to dawdle on for ten minutes, and then sit down and chat
for fifteen — that we took the opportunity of their suggesting that the sum
fixed on as their pay was insufficient, to read them a lecture. Sitting in a
row, we summoned them before us, and told them, through Paul, that we wished to
know, once for all, whether they meant to carry out the agreement they had made
with us. If they were dissatisfied, and wished to be off it, we were willing to
return to Pari, but, in that case, we should pay them nothing. The porters one
and all declared that they wished to come on, and were quite satisfied with the
terms. Having been then treated to a spirited harangue from Moore, on the ❛whole
duty of man❜ in connection with mountain-walking, and the advantages they would
reap from behaving well, the troop resumed their march. For some distance the
path, which, though broken in places, was very distinct, skirted the hillside;
but at last, by a steep and sudden descent through a grand forest of pines and
beeches, the bottom of the Nukra valley was gained. Beneath the close branches
of these trees underwood seldom flourishes, and the ground was carpeted with a
soft moss, like that of an English glade. On reaching the banks of the torrent,
we turned up the valley by a beaten track, which, but for the occasional
obstruction of a fallen tree, would have been practicable for horses — now
through the thick wood, now across glades where the rich herbage recalled to our
recollection the weeds of the Zenes-Squali. One of the porters brought us the
branch of a small shrub, with the explanatory remark ❛tchai,❜ and we recognised
the teaplant. We had already been informed at Pari of its existence in the
neighbourhood, and the Cossacks there told us that some of their predecessors
had turned the leaves to practical account, and acquired sufficient skill to
manufacture out of them a very tolerable beverage. We caught occasional vistas
of the foaming torrent of the Nakra, which fulls in a prolonged rapid, dashed
into sheets of white foam, over the granite boulders it has brought down with it
from the central chain. The blue sky was bright overhead, and the sun’s rays
very powerful; we longed for a photographic camera to turn them to account, and
fix some of the pictures of wood and water that constantly met our eyes.

At an early hour in the afternoon, our porters surprised us, by sitting down on
the banks of the torrent, at a spot where the roar of the water was so loud that
it was difficult to carry on any conversation, and proposing we should remain
there for the night. We refused to listen to the proposition, and prevented its
renewal by walking on, at a pace which the men were unable or unwilling to keep
up with. About 5 P.M. we found a position suitable for a camp, on the further
side of some clear springs, which were surrounded by dense herbage, rich in
flowering plants. Here our tent was soon set up and Paul had a roaring fire of
logs to cook by. After a good dinner we flattered ourselves we should spend a
quiet night; but at sunset the odious hum of the mosquito commenced, and we were
attacked by the venomous little insects, as well as by swarms of a small black
fly, no bigger than a pin’s head, but armed with a sharp sting. Our Pari men now
told Paul that the people of the last village we had halted at purposed
following us and stealing our goods during the night, and that we had better
divide our baggage amongst them to guard. Feeling sure that, if any robbery was
attempted, it would be with the connivance of our attendants, we ordered all the
baggage to be piled against the opening of the tent, and told them that our
fifteen barrels would be fired without warning if we heard anyone stirring near
it. Although no robbers appeared, the night did not pass wholly without alarm.
The silence of the forest was broken by a loud crash, like a rattle of musketry,
which we found, in the morning, had been caused by the fall of a large tree
within fifty yards of our camp.

*July 25th.* — Our rest was disturbed, and before the early sunshine lit up the
pine-forests on the opposite slopes, we were up, and woefully detailing to one
another the sufferings of the night. Francois’ eyes were almost closed by the
bites of the small flies; and all the party were more or less disfigured. As
soon as the porters had finished tying up their loads, and could be persuaded to
put them on their backs, we started. On leaving Pari we had understood that we
should cross the pass on the second day; but our men now declared it would be
impossible to do more than reach the southern foot of the last ascent before
nightfall. Having passed through a belt of pines, we entered a region of
scantier and less lofty vegetation, and saw, for the first time, the range of
cliffs which, to all appearance, closes the head of the glen. The hillsides were
now steep, and slopes of débris, brought down by avalanches from the hollows in
the mountains overhead, extended down to the torrent. Numerous and clear
fountains sprang out of the ground, and, dammed by the surrounding blocks,
formed crystal pools, the banks of which were adorned by clusters of lilies of
the valley. Two pretty cascades dashed down the rocks on either side of us, but
lacked body of water to rank as first rate waterfalls. The last birches grew in
the hollow at the foot of the cliffs which had barred our view all the morning.

We now saw that the Five Verst Map was entirely wrong in its representation of
this part of the chain. The officers employed on the survey evidently contented
themselves with a distant view of the Nakra valley, and, deceived by
appearances, have in consequence represented its head as a symmetrical horseshoe
basin. In reality the sources of the stream lie in a recess of the mountains
unseen from below, and therefore ignored on the map. The way to it lay up a
steep slope on the left bank of the torrent, which is joined by a good-sized
tributary, pouring over the cliffs on the opposite side, from a glacier only a
portion of which was visible. In this direction our porters asserted a pass to
exist, leading to the villages on the headwaters of the Kuban, in the Karatechai
district.

It was only midday, but our lazy troop wanted to halt for the afternoon,
alleging that it was impossible to cross the pass before evening, and that if
they went any further they should be frozen during the night. With much
persuasion we prevailed on them to follow us for two-and-a-half hours more. A
sharp ascent, marked with the last traces of a path on this side of the pass,
brought us to the level of an upper valley, for some distance bare of herbage,
and covered with the snow and rocks of spring-avalanches. The direction of this
trough is for about two miles due east, when it splits into two glens, running
respectively north and south, of which the former is the most considerable.
Having crossed the stream by a snow-bridge, we came to a grass-slope, broken by
projecting boulders, just at the junction of the glens. It was difficult to find
a plot of turf for the tent, and we were obliged to dislodge the porters from a
noble bivouac they had appropriated to themselves under a huge boulder, where
alone the ground was level. When the tent was put up the space proved ample for
all.

The view from our ❛gite❜ which was entirely surrounded by snowy mountains, was
very grand. Deep beneath us lay the lower Nakra valley, the range on its western
flank crowned by a fine ice-coated peak, occupying the position of the Tau
Borkushel of the map. The stream we had lately crossed had run but a short
course since leaving its cradle — a glacier flowing round the base of a very
remarkable mountain, the perpendicular cliffs of which were overhung by an
ice-cornice of enormous thickness. The head of the glen, on the north, was also
closed by a glacier; the route, however, does not lead over it, but makes for a
gap between two rocky eminences in the chain on its east. The afternoon sun beat
full against the face of the rock under which our tent was pitched, and the heat
inside the canvas was great. I rashly sought coolness in a shady nook in the
rocks, and thereby caught a chill, which, on the top of a previous slight
indisposition, made me for a time very unwell. Wrapping myself up as warmly as
possible in my plaid, I took at intervals small doses of chlorodyne, a medicine
which throughout our journey we found of the greatest service.

Towards evening we observed four men, armed with guns and swords, and driving
eleven cows, descending from the direction of the pass at a hurried pace. Paul
enquired of our men where they came from, and was told that they were natives of
Lashrash, who, according to custom, had been on a cattle-lifting expedition over
the pass, and were now returning with their unlawfully-gotten booty, stolen from
one of the herds belonging to the Tartars of the Upper Baksan. Our porters
naturally felt uneasy as to the reception they, as the countrymen of the
thieves, would meet with on the north side, and we had great difficulty in
persuading them to proceed any further. We succeeded, however, in convincing all
but one hoary-headed old rascal that the fact of their being with us would be a
conclusive proof of their innocence. The man in question knew, apparently, that
his character would not bear examination, and, conscious probably of some recent
misdemeanour, begged to be allowed to return — adding that his two sons, who
were also with us, would share his load between them. To this family arrangement
we of course made no objection. The sunset hues were gorgeous, but too vivid to
promise a continuance of the fine weather of the last two days.

*July 26th.* — The weather had changed during the night, clouds were creeping up
from the south, and the morning promised to grow worse rather than better. Pain
and constant sickness had driven away sleep, and I felt much more fit to lie in
bed than to cross a pass; but it was absolutely impossible to remain where we
were, and the idea of returning to Pari, now a long day’s walk in the rear, was
insupportable, besides offering few advantages over the only alternative course
— that of reaching the watershed before bad weather came on. We therefore
started, and although at first I could scarcely crawl along, even with the help
of Tucker and Francois, necessity proved a wonderful spur; my strength gradually
returned, and each step gained towards the top of the pass was an encouragement
to further progress.

Above our bivouac the head of the valley was paved with snow; the surface had
not frozen in the night, and its softness added considerably to my troubles. In
an hour’s time we reached the point where the glen is quitted, and the traveller
desirous to cross the chain must climb the steep banks of grass on his right.
These lead him to the edge of a considerable snowfield, which fills a recess in
the rocky ridges on the southern side of the pass. The gap in the crest before
us was marked by two stonemen, and we had a further guide in the deep trail of
the cattle that had passed the previous afternoon. The clouds now swept up round
us, the wind howled dismally, and, as we drew near the top, heavy snow began to
fall. The change in the weather was a great disappointment, for we had been
looking forward, ever since leaving Pari, to the view of Elbruz during the
descent, and all hopes of seeing it were now at an end.

When we reached the top, there was nothing for it but to sit down with our backs
to the snowstorm, and munch a crust of bread before descending. A few flowering
plants were growing on the rocks, at a height of over 10,500 feet. On the north
side is a small glacier, steep enough in places to admit of glissades, but so
thickly covered with snow that few crevasses were visible. The falling sleet
soon turned into heavy rain, which followed us for the rest of the day. The
stream which flows from this glacier is very soon lost to sight under another
and very extraordinary ice-stream, which seems to be fed entirely by the
avalanches falling from the cliffs of a great mountain, now partially hidden by
clouds, but afterwards well known to us by the name of Tungzorun. Like Uschba,
unmarked in the Five Verst Map, it is probably the second in height of the
mountains of the main chain west of the Koschtantau group.

The glen on this side of the pass runs directly north, and the path, marked out
at first by occasional stonemen, soon becomes very distinct. We kept along the
western slopes at some height above the glacier, which is covered by débris, and
has a dirty appearance; its tongue curls over a steep brow, and at its lower end
meets the highest firs. Beneath us, under the clouds, we could see the green
Baksan valley; but opposite, where Elbruz should have displayed his full height,
nothing met the view but a sea of mist, from which two glacier-tongues protruded
only at intervals. A descent, rapid at the last, brought us to the banks of the
Baksan. Its upper valley is a trough, with a level floor about a quarter of a
mile in width, through which the three streams flowing respectively from the
glaciers of Elbruz and Tungzorun, and from the larger ice-stream which fills the
head of the valley, run parallel for some distance before joining. It is covered
with a thick forest of firs, which in this district entirely take the place of
pines. Our men turned several hundred yards out of the way, to visit a very
rudely-constructed and now deserted log-hut, where, in partial shelter from the
incessant rainstorm, we ate some food.

Not altogether to our surprise, the porters refused to re-shoulder their packs,
and demanded immediate payment, declaring that they had fulfilled their contract
to take us over to Baksan, and persistently ignoring the express stipulation we
had made with them, that Baksan was to be taken as meaning the chief village in
the upper valley. One of the men, who had been disagreeable in his manner
throughout, now became very violent, and made pretence of drawing his dagger.
Moore took the leading part in the diplomacy on our side. His policy was to
ignore the ruffian, and refuse to have dealings with any but the two men with
whom we had first made the agreement at Pari, who were far the best of the
party, and little disposed to join in the violence of some of their companions.
The rage of the chief ruffian at being ignored was ludicrous, but, after a long
and wearisome wrangle, the malcontents gave in, and the train again got into
motion — the virtue of the well-disposed men being confirmed by the promise of
an extra rouble on our arrival at Uraspich, if no further questions occurred.

Although we had no more rows, the delays to which we were subjected were
frequent and vexatious. It is a trial of temper to sit on a log, wet through,
out of sorts, and in a pouring rain, while half your attendants hurry off
without apparent purpose, and the remainder refuse to stir until their
companions return, We learnt, afterwards, that the men were looking for the
shepherds, whom they knew to be somewhere in the neighbourhood with their
flocks. Having been living for the last three days on the provisions they
carried with them from home — which consisted only of coarse flour, baked every
evening on hot stones by a wood-fire — they naturally wished to have a good
meal, and were now anxious to purchase a lamb for their supper. We could not at
the time understand their motive, which for some unknown reason they were
unwilling to explain, and we naturally grew very wroth at the
constantly-recurring halts. After a long walk, in a deluge of rain, through
dripping fir-forests, we reached a log-hut, well-built, and fortunately quite
watertight. We were glad enough to find a restingplace where we could get off
our wet clothes, and warm ourselves round a roaring fire. Our rugs we generally
managed to keep dry, by rolling them up inside the mattrass, so we had something
besides the ground to lie on. Milk and cheese were procured from the shepherds,
and after an attempt to make a brew of arrowroot, the results of which were not
wholly satisfactory, we rolled ourselves up in one corner of the hut, and
enjoyed a tolerable night's rest.

During the evening we had some amusing conversation with our men. We found that
the names ❛England❜ and ❛English❜ conveyed no idea to their minds, and that the
only peoples of which they had any knowledge were Russians, Turks, and ❛Franghi❜
(foreigners). After this it was rather startling to be suddenly asked, what we
considered the best form of government? Moore shirked the question by replying
that certainly that form of government could not be considered good under which
the people of one valley could carry off cattle belonging to the inhabitants of
another — an answer which, when interpreted by Paul, seemed to tickle our
friends amazingly, and to be considered fully adequate.

*July 27th.* — The morning was fine, and we started hopefully. We were led by a
circuitous track along the northern hillside, owing to our men’s ignorance of
the direct path down the valley. The forest comes to an end suddenly, and is
succeeded by green meadows, amongst which stand several groups of buildings,
answering to Alpine chalets. They were long, low, and irregular-shaped huts,
built of very massive unsmoothed fir-logs, with flat grassgrown roofs. The first
we came to were uninhabited. The Baksan valley, after running for some distance
northeast, bends northwards, and then again resumes its former direction. At the
elbow it is joined by two tributary glens — one on the right, running up towards
the main chain; another a mile lower on the left, which leads towards the foot
of Elbruz. Opposite the first opening there was an exceedingly striking view of
a cluster of snowy peaks, remarkable for their fantastic forms and close
grouping.

A farmhouse, apparently the highest permanent habitation in the valley, is
situated opposite the mouth of this glen; in a small enclosure at the back,
potatoes and other kinds of vegetables seemed to flourish. We kept along the
left bank of the Baksan, and presently crossed the powerful torrent which flows
from the eastern icefields of Elbruz, but the gap out of which it flows is not
wide enough to admit of any view of the great mountain. We succeeded in finding
an old man at one of the huts built beside the torrent, and in obtaining a bowl
of fresh milk — a, rare luxury in the Caucasus, where it is generally turned
sour directly, and is then very unpalatable. The lower portion of the walk from
this point to Uruspieh is undeniably dull, the principal feature being a bold
rockwall on the right-hand side of the valley, which rises just above the
snow-level. The mountain-sides are no longer wooded, and have an arid burnt-up
appearance. An enormous barrier, abutting on the northern chain, very similar in
form to the Kirchet above Meyringen, blocks the valley, and the path has to
climb over it. From the brow, Uruspieh is seen for the first time, still
separated from the traveller by a long stretch of level ground. The road, now
passable for narrow carts, crosses the Baksan at the base of the mound, and
traverses a succession of meadows on the right bank, recrossing only just before
it enters the village of Uruspieh. The character of the houses is entirely
different from the Suanetian fortresses, and far less picturesque; built on a
gentle slope, the low flatroofed buildings are scarcely distinguishable at a
distance, and offer no external attractions on nearer approach. A strong
torrent, flowing out of a ravine in the northern hillside, cuts the village in
half; to the south another lateral valley opens towards the main chain, and some
snowy summits are visible at its head.

The view of the Baksan valley is closed by the icy mass of Tungzorun, which from
here rather resembles in form the Zermatt Breithorn. These distant vistas rescue
Uruspieh from the charge of positive ugliness, which will certainly be brought
against it by those visitors from whom clouds veil everything but the brown
barren slopes immediately surrounding the village. A large building, just beyond
the bridge, was the abode of the princes of the Uruspieh family, who have given
their name to the place. A group was gathered round the door; the men were
dressed in the tall sheepskin hats and long coats of the country, and our
porters’ equipments seemed shabby when brought into contrast with their
silver-mounted daggers and handsome cartridge-pouches.

We were naturally most anxious as to what the character of the people would turn
out, as upon it depended whether we should be able to attack Elbruz at once, or
whether we must descend to Pätigorsk, and make the mountain the object of a
separate expedition from thence, Happily our hopes, founded on the favourable
report given by the Cossacks at Pari of the people of Baksan and the Karatchai,
were not doomed to be disappointed. Some villagers came forward, and at once
conducted us to a clean-looking cottage, which proved to be a regular
guest-house. It contained two rooms, the inner one provided with a wooden divan
in one corner. The walls and roof were constructed of the most massive
fir-trunks, and the ruddy hue of the timber, combined with the scrupulous
cleanliness of the floor, gave a snug appearance to our quarters. The princes,
it was intimated, would soon pay us a visit, and in the meantime we hastened to
settle with the Pari men, who seemed anything but at ease, and anxious to set
off home again as soon as possible.

As paymaster of the forces, I had told out the necessary quantity of notes,
separating them into the proper shares for each man, and, with Paul’s aid, was
in the act of distributing the money, when there was a stir at the further end
of the room, and the princes entered. In the consequent confusion, Paul allowed
one porter to secure two shares, and of course, when the turn of the last man
came, there was nothing left for him. I felt certain I had handed over the
proper amount of notes, but the porters all protested that each had only his own
share. The matter was suddenly settled by a villager stepping forward, and, to
our great amusement and delight, pointing out the noisy ruffian, who had given
us so much trouble on the road, as the recipient of the double portion. The
money was at once taken from him, and he seemed too doubtful as to his position
to venture on any resistance, although he indulged in a display of indignation,
and pretended to be ready to be searched. Finding, however, that he was an
object of universal laughter, even to his companions, he speedily retreated, and
we heard no more of him. Villany having thus met with its deserts, we rewarded
the comparative virtue of the two men who had held aloof in the dispute at the
head of the valley with an extra rouble, and the whole troop departed, after
much handshaking.

All our attention was now due to the princes, to whom we apologised for the
disturbed state in which they had found us. Our hosts were three brothers, tall
finelooking men, with open and kindly countenances, and dressed in the full
Caucasian costume. The younger brother, Hamzet, had been for some time in the
Russian service, and spoke Russian fluently. The interview commenced with the
usual enquiry as to our nationality: instead of the stolid ignorance exhibited
by the Mingrelians at the mention of the English name, Hamzet's face at once
brightened up, and he exclaimed, ❛Anglicany, karasho (good), Williams Pasha,
Kars, karasho.❜ It was quite like coming back into the world again, from some
region where everyone had been asleep for 500 years, to find men acquainted with
the events of the Crimean War.

We recounted our ascent of Kazbek, and our journey across the country (at both
of which great surprise was expressed), and then explained our wish to attempt
Elbruz. The princes, while admitting Kazbek to be the more precipitous mountain,
expressed great doubts of our reaching the top of Elbruz, adducing the very good
argument that no one had ever done so. They promised to send for the peasants
who had accompanied former Russian travellers bent on exploring the mountain,
and said we should be taken at least as far as anyone had been before us.

Ararat was not unknown to the princes, and they were aware of the legend by
which the Caucasian mountain is connected with the Armenian. According to local
tradition, the Ark grazed on the top of Elbruz before finally resting on Ararat.
The correct appreciation of the relative heights of the two mountains might
fairly be used as an argument for the truth of the story. If it meets with
general acceptance, we are ready cheerfully to waive any claims to the honour of
the first ascent of Elbruz in favour of the crew of the Ark, or, as Frangois
happily phrased it, ❛la famille Noah.❜

Our hosts were acquainted with the name of Elbruz, but it had to be translated
to the circle of villagers, who only knew the mountain as Minghi-Tau. The
introduction having been thus happily effected, our new friendship was cemented
by the timely arrival of a trayful of tea and cakes, which were placed on a low
three-legged stool, which served as a table.

The princes requested us to ask for whatever we wanted, and offered to supply us
with food as well as lodging. Unwilling to put them to unnecessary trouble on
the one hand, and also preferring Paul’s cookery to the hunches of boiled mutton
which form the staple dish of a Caucasian cuisine, we asked only that our
servant might be aided to procure what was wanted. In this way we were able to
pay for the large stock of provisions necessary for a campaign of at least four
days against Elbruz. Paul found all sorts of luxuries, including butter,
potatoes, and sugar — the latter coming from the princes’ household — to all of
which we had long been strangers. Having drunk nothing but tea and water since
leaving Kazbek, with the exception of the muddy wine of Glola, we welcomed
enthusiastically a villager who brought us some very fair native beer. This is
probably the liquid referred to by old Klaproth, who mentions that the beer made
by the Karatchai and Baksan people ❛is nearly equal to London porter,❜ although,
in that case, either the London brewers must have improved since his time, or
the native manufacture deteriorated. We were supplied at night with the unwonted
luxury of pillows and sheets, and were thus able to sleep out of our clothes for
the first time since leaving Kuazbek. It is a curious fact, the reason of which
we failed to comprehend, that while in the Mahommedan districts cushions in
abundance are generally found, they seem utterly unknown in the nominally
Christian parts of the country. The reason is obscure, but the fact remains
that, whether at Christian villages or Russian post-stations, the traveller must
carry his own mattrass, or be content to lie on boards.

*July 28th.* — The day was given up to eating and doing nothing, which we
succeeded in enjoying thoroughly. Relays of tea and cakes filled up the
intervals between heavier meals, and the spare time left at our disposal was
spent in sunning ourselves at the door of the cottage, or in conversation with
our hosts, who introduced us to a visitor, a Suanetian prince of the
Dadisch-Kilian family, allied to them by marriage. He was probably one of the
rulers of Betscho, the branch of the Ingur valley lying at the base of Uschba,
as Radde mentions their connection and frequent intercourse with the tribes on
the north side of the chain. The Suanetian was haughtily aristocratic in his
personal appearance and manners, and his presence seemed rather a restraint on
everybody else. He was tall, with regular features, but a very unintellectual
expression of countenance, and a supercilious dandified air, which would have
done credit to a man more accustomed to civilised life. The native princes
were far better-informed men than any we had yet met in the mountains. Only two
days’ journey from Pätigorsk and Kislovodsk, Uruspieh is frequently visited by
Russian travellers or officials, and even the rambling photographer has carried
his camera thus far. The last visitors had been two Frenchmen in search of rare
woods, who had come here to see what they could find. We heard of them
elsewhere, and ultimately saw their purchases on the quay at Poti, on the point
of being shipped. The people are thus brought into contact with the European
world, but its rumours echo faintly in this remote corner of the continent. The
princes themselves are men of taste: one is a good musician; the other, whose
mind seemed to be of a practical turn, has gained some information during his
Russian service beyond that of a purely military character. Accustomed at home
to nothing but the perishable cream-cheeses which are alone made in the
Caucasus, he had been struck by the ❛Gruyére❜ eaten in Russia, and had set to
work to imitate it with very tolerable success. Before our departure we saw also
a number of improved carts, which had been constructed under his directions, to
replace the clumsy machines formerly in use. The facts connected with our
country most deeply impressed on his mind were, that it had produced a great
dramatic author named Shakespeare, and that Englishmen lived entirely on
beefsteaks and porter; he was profuse in his apologies at being unable to supply
us with our national food, and offered to send up to the pasturage and have a
bullock slaughtered, a proposal the execution of which was only prevented by our
declaring ourselves quite contented with the sheep we had just bought.

We endeavoured to extract as much information as possible as to the customs and
mode of life of the people, but it is very difficult to talk on any but the
simplest subjects through an uneducated interpreter. The sum of what we gathered
was, that the natives of this and the upper valloys next to the east consider
themselves a distinct race from the Tcherkesses, who dwell on the verge of the
steppes and in the mountains to the westward. The people here claim to he the
old inhabitants, and to have been dispossessed of their ancient supremacy when
the hordes of Tcherkesses from the Crimea inundated the country. Their language
is Tartar, and their religion, as far as they have any, is Mahommedan; the
princes seemed, however, to be very broad and tolerant in their views. The
imperial sway of Russia does not press hardly on these mountaineers, who pay
only a light house-tax, are exempt from conscription, and are too remote to be
exposed to those petty restraints which a once-free people often find the
hardest to bear. Their local government has been generally described as feudal;
it seemed to us that patriarchal would be the more fitting word. The princes are
the recognised heads of the community; they live in a house four times the size
of any other in the village, they are richest in flocks and herds, and on them
falls the duty of entertaining strangers; but their word is not law, and they
can only persuade, not compel, their poorer neighbours to carry out their
wishes.

We acquired some geographical information as to the neighbouring mountains.
There are two routes into Suanetia — the one by which we had come, through the
Nakra valley; and another leading up the glen, due south of Uruspieh, and
crossing, as far as we could understand, to the Betscho district. This last,
though higher than that which we had crossed, was said to be practicable for
horses. The traveller desirous of reaching Utschkulau,^[^1100]^ the principal village in
the Karatchai district, has the choice of skirting the northern or southern
flanks of Elbruz. If prepared to undertake on foot a glacierpass, he will go up
to the sources of the Baksan, and traverse the range connecting Elbruz with the
watershed, to the Upper Kuban. If he prefers a less toilsome journey, he will
ride over two northerly spurs, descending between them to cross the valley of
the Malka. By either route Utschkulan can be reached on the third day. The Malka
is the stream which rises in the northern glacier of Elbruz, and it is from its
head that most of the Russian explorers have viewed the mountain, and that the
first and most famous attempt to reach its top was made, by the expedition under
the command of General Emmanuel, in 1829. There was a report in the village that
some Russian officers had lately been seen on the Malka, and we felt some alarm,
lest the news of our success on Kazbek had stirred up the officials to endeavour
to anticipate us by a prior assault on Elbruz. We never heard anything further
of our supposed rivals, and if there was any truth in the story, it referred, I
believe, only to a pleasure-party who had come up from Kislovodsk to look at the
mountain.^[^1101]^

The princes promised that the necessary attendants for our expedition should be
ready early in the morning, and also that they would supply us with large
loaves, better fit for carrying than the small crumbly cakes usually eaten in
the villages. The terms asked by the men who were to act as porters were two
roubles apiece for each day, to which we made no objection. In the evening we
were amused by the athletic sports of the youngsters who were gathered outside
our door. Two boys began wrestling, and were incited to the most valorous
struggles by the promise of a twenty-copeck piece to the winner. The villagers
were constantly passing and repassing in front of our door, and we had ample
opportunities of studying their characteristics. The men were a fine race, with
a very high type of countenance. The women we saw were prematurely old and
wrinkled, with the exception of the quite young girls, who were many of them
pretty little things, with close-fitting caps hung round with coins, and lone
elf-locks streaming out from beneath. The men cannot possess all the beauty of
the races but as this is a Mahommedan country, the young wives and marriageable
maidens are probably kept more or less in seclusion.

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption }
![Woman of Uruspieh.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0357.jpg "Woman of Uruspieh."){#b357}
::::

*July 29th.* — As usual in the morning, although we got up and breakfasted
early, the porters did not appear till two hours later, and then only dropped in
one by one. The broad too had not been baked, and it was not till 8.30 A.M. that
all our preparations were completed. We had with us five natives, who put the
greater part of their loads, for the present, on the backs of two horses, which
were to go with us as far as the highest pasturage. Our companions were equipped
with poles, armed with tremendous iron spikes about two feet long, gradually
tapering to a point, and a species of ❛crampon,❜ to attach to the heel in
climbing ice or slippery turf. They soon proved themselves far better walkers
than any we had yet had to do with, and we retraced our steps up the valley at a
very tolerable pace. Our plan had been to turn up the glen leading to the
eastern glacier of Elbruz, which, by the map, is manifestly the most direct
route to the mountain, and, owing to cur difficulty in conversing with the
porters, it was not till the point where we proposed turning oft was reached
that we found their intentions differed. They declared that we must go up the
main Baksan valley to its head, and then turn to the right, in order to reach
the south-eastern Elbruz glacier. The objections to the route we proposed were
diverse; there were no shepherds in that direction, there was no path up the
glen, and it made such a circuit that it would take three days to reach the foot
of the mountain. The first two reasons were plausible; the third was ridiculous,
and entirely contradicted by the views we subsequently had in the course of the
ascent.

As soon as we understood the points of the case, we acquiesced in our men’s
wishes, and continued in our old tracks up the valley, occasionally profiting by
their local knowledge to make short cuts through the wood. Close to the hut
where we had spent the night after crossing the range, wild strawberries grew in
great profusion, but, generally speaking, they do not abound in this country. A
bend in the direction of the valley hides its head from the 
traveller until he has rounded a projection of the northern mountain-side, the
base of which the stream hugs so closely, that the path is obliged to wind along
the slopes overlooking the thick fir-wood beneath, Here we met some hunters
driving two donkeys, each laden with a fine bouquetin, recently killed on the
edge of the glacier. The head of one carried a noble pair of horns, but the
second was a comparatively young animal. Having at length turned the corner, we
saw before us the source of the Balsan, a large glacier filling the head of the
valley. At a deserted hut we halted for a consultation, and our men gave us the
choice of turning up a glen opening on our right, or going still farther up the
valley, We decided on taking the former, as being the most direct course.

The climb into the glen was rather rapid; above us, on the left, rose a striking
mass of columnar basalt strangely contorted, and of a deep ruddy hue. The long
grass was full of snakes, which, as a rule, are rarely found in the Caucasus.
One of the porters beckoned me to follow him a few feet up the slope above the
path, and pointed out a flattened snow-dome, just visible over the top of the
fine icefall that closed the glen, as ❛Minghi-Tau.❜ This was our first sight of
Elbruz since we landed in the Caucasus, our only previous glimpse of the
mountain having been from the Black Sea steamer, when approaching Poti.
Half-an-hour’s walls below the end of the glacier, we found the shepherds, who
had fixed their quarters in a level meadow, which we reached in nine hours from
Uruspieh. In order that we might be within easy reach of capital milk, cheese,
and ❛kaimak❜ (a species of Devonshire cream) — delicacies of mountain life which
had been long wanting on the south side of the chain — our tent was pitched
close to the herdsmen’s bivouac. The sheep, apparently disturbed by the novel
erection which disfigured their resting-place, determined to get rid of it, and
spent the greater part of the night in charging down on the sides of our
shelter. Fortunately, an Alpine tent is not easily upset, but our slumbers were
constantly broken by the uneasy consciousness of an angry animal butting within
a foot of our heads.

*July 30th.* — The morning was fine, and the cold wind seemed likely to be the
harbinger of a spell of settled weather. We did not expect a long day’s work, as
we were already at a height of about 8,000 feet, and were not likely to find an
eligible spot for our tent above 12,000 feet. We started, however, in fair time,
in order, in case of need, to be able to push on, and reconnoitre the work
before us. The horses came on, for half an hour, to the foot of the glacier,
which has retired considerably of late years: there are distinct ancient
moraines, now overgrown with herbage, a quarter of a mile in advance of the
present termination of the ice. Crossing the torrent, which was divided into
several branches, we began to ascend the steep hillside on the right of the
icefall, which is tolerably clean, and finely broken into towers and pinnacles,
After some time a line of crags appeared to bar the way; they are, however,
easily turned in one place, near a little fall which tumbles in a pretty shower
of water-rockets over the almost perpendicular strata of basaltic rock. Above
this, gentian-studded slopes of short turf were soon succeeded by alternate beds
of snow and boulders, extending to the foot of a steep bank, from the top of
which we gained a clearer insight into the configuration of the mountain-side.

We were on a rocky ridge, the summit of which, still some six hundred feet above
our heads, confines the upper snowfield, which overflows towards the Baksan by
two channels — one, the icefall beside which we had ascended: and a second,
farther west, and nearer the head of the valley. The porters had made a long
circuit in order to avoid the steep bank we had just climbed, and were now out
of sight. Moore was unwell, and had walked thus far with much difficulty;
Tucker, Francois, and I therefore set off to climb the ridge before us, in the
hopes of finding a suitable spot for a bivouac near its summit. The boulders
were very big, and, although there was no difficulty in scrambling over them, it
was long before we could find a plot of ground six feet square which, by any
stretch of language, could be called level. When we at last succeeded, we
announced the fact by a shout to our friend below, and hastened on to see what
was above. The highest rocks were soon passed, and a further climb of about
fifty feet brought us to the level of a great snowfield, surrounding the final
cone of Elbruz, which rose immediately before us, resembling in shape an
inverted tea-cup. The mountain appeared to have two summits, of nearly equal
height, and both easy of access to anyone accustomed to Alpine climbing.

Thoroughly satisfied with our inspection, we returned to the spot we had chosen
for our tent, and set vigorously to work to make the surface level. To effect
this we dug out, with our ice-axes, nearly a foot of stony earth at the upper
side, and spread it below — increasing the breadth, which was insufficient, by
breaking off masses of rock on one side, and throwing them down on the other. We
then completed and filled up the interstices of the natural wall of rock to
windward, and, having finished our labours, sat down very contentedly to admire
our handiwork, and await the long-delayed arrival of the rest of the party. At
last our porters came up, and the tent was pitched. The evening view from our
eyrie — the height of which was about 12,000 feet — was superb. Looking nearly
south, across the trough of the Baksan to the central chain opposite, the
square-headed Tungzorun rose grandly, its cliffs capped with a huge cornice of
ice, and a broad stainless glacier streaming down one of its flanks. Further
cast, in a double-toothed giant, we recognised our startling Suanetian
acquaintance Uschba, bearing, it is true, more ice on his northern side, but
quite as inaccessible in appearance as from the south.

Our enjoyment of the scene was interrupted by a perfectly unforeseen
disturbance. Our porters presented a demand for their first two days’ pay; we
reminded them that they had distinctly agreed that the settlement was to be
delayed until our return to Uruspieh, but at the same time offered the money in
two notes. They refused it, and required that each man should be given his exact
portion; we told them we had not sufficient small notes with us, on which they
announced their intention of returning home, and leaving us to get our luggage
back as best we could. Such unreasonable conduct could only be met with
contempt, and we answered that they might do as they pleased: that we should
start soon after midnight, and should return in the afternoon, and, unless our
goods were carried safely down to the shepherds’ bivouac before nightfall,
should pay them nothing; we added, that if any of them were willing to attempt
the ascent it would give us great pleasure, and that they should have every
assistance from our rope and ice-axes. On receiving this message from Paul the
five all departed, as they would have had us believe, never to return; but in
less than half an hour they came back, like boys who had had their sulk out, and
made a halt apology for their behaviour. This difficulty being satisfactorily
smoothed over, the men retreated to lairs somewhat lower down the hillside,
while we prepared for the night. Paul had, contrary to our advice, insisted on
coming with us; he was so anxious to ascend the famous mountain, which he had
lived near and heard talked of all his life, that we did not like to check his
enthusiasm, especially as there seemed no reason why he should not accomplish
his desire. The night promised to be cold, and we invited Francois to come
inside the tent — which, as we had proved on Kazbek, would at a pinch
accommodate four — while Paul found a sheltered couch in a trench we had dug at
the head of the tent.

*July 31st.* — The cold during the night was so intense, that the water in a
gutta-percha bag, which we had filled overnight and hung within the canvas, was
frozen before morning into a solid sausage of ice, and in consequence, having no
firewood with us, we could procure nothing to drink. At 2.10 A.M., having
attached ourselves with the rope, in the knowledge that *terra firma* would soon
be left behind, we set out alone, the natives not answering to our shouts. In
climbing the steep snow-banks which lead to the ❛grand plateau❜ Paul slipped
about helplessly, and Tucker had almost to drag him for some distance. When, in
a quarter of an hour, we reached the edge of the great snow-plain, Elbruz loomed
before us, huge and pale, but, to our surprise and disgust, partially shrouded
by a black cloud. The walking was now easy, and we tramped on in solemn, not to
say surly silence, our iceaxes under our arms, and our hands in our pockets. We
were well protected from the severe cold by Welsh wigs, scarves, cardigans, and
muffetees, though, owing to our men having mislaid my gaiters, I offered one
weak point to the enemy’s attack.

A few benighted people still reiterate the assertion that the true beauty of
nature ceases at the snow-level, and that those who go beyond it get no reward
for their pains except the satisfaction of having treated a great mountain as a
greased pole. As we tramped over the snowfields of Elbruz, I could not help
wishing we had some of these unbelievers with us, because, while they would have
been compelled to admit the startling grandeur of the situation, the intense
cold would have inflicted on them a just punishment for their past offences. The
last rays of the setting moon lit up the summits of the main chain, over the
gaps in which we already saw portions of the southern spurs. The icy sides of
Uschba and Tungzorun reflected the pale gleam of the sky: a dark rock-peak
further west stood in deep shadow. We were high enough to overlook the ridges
that run out from Elbruz towards the north-east, in which direction a dark band
of vapour, illuminated by fitful flashes of sheetlightning, overhung the distant
steppe. The thick black cloud was still on the mountain before us; otherwise the
sky overhead was clear, and the stars shone out with preternatural brilliancy.

Near the point where the snow began to slope towards the base of the mountain,
the crisp surface broke under my feet, and I disappeared, as suddenly as through
a trapdoor, into a concealed crevasse. Paul, who was next behind me on the rope,
was horror-struck, and his first impulse was to rush to the brink to see what
had become of me, a course of proceeding which had to be summarily checked by my
companions. The crevasse was one of those which gradually enlarge as they
descend, but the check given by the rope enabled me at once to plant my feet on
a ledge on one side, and my back against the other. The position was more
ludicrous than uncomfortable. I had both hands in my pockets, and my ice-axe
under my arm; and owing to the tightness of the rope, and the cramped space, it
was not easy to make the axe serviceable without fear of dropping it into the
unknown depths below, The snow-crust on the side of the hole I had made broke
away beneath my arms when I first tried to raise myself on it, and it cost us
all a long struggle before I was hauled out and landed safely.

The slopes now steepened, the cold grew more intense, and the wind almost
unbearable, so that altogether the prospect was far from cheering. The morning
star aroused us to a temporary enthusiasm by the strange accompaniments and
brightness of its rising. Heralded by a glow of light, which made one of the
party exclaim, ❛There comes the sun!❜ it leapt forth with a sudden splendour
from amidst the flashes of lightning playing in the dark cloud that lay below,
shrouding the distant steppe. The shock was but momentary, and we soon relapsed
into a state of icy despair, which was not diminished by the sudden desertion of
Paul, who, fairly beaten by the intense cold, turned and fled down our traces.
For hour after hour we went on without a halt, hoping that the sun would bring
with it an increase of warmth.

A sunrise viewed from a height equal to that of the top of Mont Blanc is a scene
of unearthly splendour, of which words can convey but a feeble impression. A
sudden kindling of the eastern ranges first warned us to be on the watch: in a
moment the snow upon which we were standing, the crags above us, indeed the
whole atmosphere, were suffused with rose-pink. The cloud on the summit, which
had changed from black to grey as daylight dawned, now caught the pervading
flush, and suddenly melted away, like a ghost who had outstayed his time. As the
hues faded, the sun’s orb rose in the east, and flooded us with a stream of
golden rays, which were soon merged in the clear light of day. There was no
increase of warmth as yet, and, despite the improved look of the weather, it
became a serious question whether we could go on. By 7.50 A.M., we were at a
height of over 16,000 feet, and had now reached the rocks which form the upper
portion of the cone. Finding what shelter we could among them, we stood
shivering, kicking our feet against the rock, and beating our fingers, to
preserve them if possible from frostbite, while the debate, as to whether we
should turn back or not, was carried on in voices almost inaudible from the
chattering of our teeth. On the one hand, the wind did not abate, and the risk
of frostbites was growing serious; Tucker and Francois had no sensation in their
fingers, and my toes were similarly affected. On the other hand, the rocks were
less cold to the feet, and gave some shelter from the weather. Looking back, we
saw, to our surprise, two of the porters advancing rapidly in our footsteps. We
had almost decided to turn when they came up to us, looking fairly comfortable
in their big sheepskin cloaks, and quite unaffected by the cold. A third,
however, who had started with them, had, like Paul, given in. I said, ❛If a
porter goes on, I will go with him.❜ ❛If one goes, all go,❜ added Moore. The
decision was accepted, and we again set our faces to the mountain.

From this time the cold, though severe, ceased to be painful. A long climb up
easy rocks, mostly broken small, with here and there a large knob projecting
from the surface, brought us to the foot of a low cliff, to surmount which a few
steps were cut in an ice-couloir, the only approach to a difficulty on the
mountain. Arrived on the top of what had for long been our skyline, we saw as
much more rock above us. Doubts were even now felt, and expressed, as to our
success. We persevered, however, making but few and short halts. until the base
of some bold crags, we had taken long to reach, was passed. Almost suddenly, at
the last, we found ourselves on a level with their tops, and stepped on to a
broad crest, running east and west. We turned to the left, and faced the wind,
for a final struggle. The ridge was easy, and, led by the porters, we marched
along it in procession, with our hands in our pockets, and our ice-axes under
our arms, until it culminated in a bare path of rock surrounded by snow. This
summit was at one end of a horseshoe ridge, crowned by three distinct eminences,
and enclosing a snowy plateau, which, even to our unlearned eyes, irresistibly
suggested an old crater. The rocks which we picked up, and carried down with us,
are of a volcanic character. We walked, or rather ran, round the ridge to its
extremity, crossing two considerable depressions, and visiting all three tops;
under the farthest, a tower of rock, we found shelter and a quite endurable
temperature. There we sat down, to examine, as far as possible, into the details
of the vast panorama. The two natives pointed out the various valleys, while we
endeavoured to recognise the mountains. Light clouds were driving against the
western face of the peak, and a sea of mist hid the northern steppe — otherwise
the view was clear. Beginning in the east, the feature of the panorama was the
central chain between ourselves and Kazbek. I never saw any group of mountains
which bore so well being looked down upon as the great peaks that stand over the
sources of the Tcherek and Tehegem. The Pennines from Mont Blanc look puny in
comparison with Koschtantau and his neighbours from Elbruz. The Caucasian groups
are finer, and the peaks sharper, and there was suggestion of unseen depth in
the trenches separating them, that I never noticed so forcibly in any Alpine
view.

Turning southwards, the double-toothed Uschba still asserted himself, although
at last distinctly beneath us; the greater part of the summits and snowfields of
the chain between us and Suanetia lay, as on a relieved map, at our feet, and we
could see beyond them the snowy-crested Leila, and in the far distance the blue
ranges of the Turkish frontier, between Batoum and Achaltzich. Shifting again
our position, we looked over the shoulders of a bold rock-peak, the loftiest to
the west of Elbruz, and endeavoured to make out the Black Sea. Whether the level
grey surface which met our eyes was water, or a filmy mist hanging over its
surface, it was impossible to distinguish. The mists, beating below on the slope
of the mountain, hid the sources of the Kuban, but we looked immediately down
upon those of the Malka. On this side the slope of the mountain seemed to be
uniform for nearly 10,000 feet; and although there is nothing in its steepness
to render an ascent impossible, the climb would be very long and toilsome.

We were not hungry, and, if we had wished to drink anyone’s health, we had
nothing to drink it in; so we gave vent to our feelings, and surprised the
porters, with ❛Three times three, and one more!❜ in honour of the old mountain,
which, by the help of wind and cold, had made so good a fight against us. We
then hurried back to the first summit, on which, as it seemed somewhat the
highest, Francois had already set himself to work, to erect a small stone-man.

At this period, some one remembered that we had forgotten all about the rarity
of the air; we tried to observe it, but failed, and I think the fact that, at a
height of 18,500 feet, no single man, out of a party of six, was in any way
affected, helps to prove that mountain-sickness is not a necessary evil, and
that it only affects those who are in bad training, or out of sorts, at the
time. Such is my experience, so far as it goes, having only twice suffered from
it — once in an attempt on the Dent Blanche, on the first day of a Swiss tour,
and again on Ararat, when quite out of condition. We reached the top of Elbruz
at 10.40, and left a few minutes after 11 A.M. We had some difficulty in
reconciling the appearance of the top of the mountain, when seen from a
distance, either on the north or south, with its actual shape. From Poti, or
Pätigorsk, Elbruz appears to culminate in two peaks of apparently equal height,
separated by a considerable hollow. The gaps between the summits we visited are
not more than 150 feet deep, and we were surprised at their being so conspicuous
from a distance. In walking round the horseshoe ridge, we naturally looked out
to see if there was not some other summit, but none was visible; and on the west
(where, if anywhere, it should have been found), the slopes appeared to break
down abruptly towards the Karatchai, and there were no clouds dense enough to
have concealed any eminence nearly equalling in height that upon which we stood.

The ascent from our bivouac — one of 6,500 feet, or 800 feet more than Mont
Blanc from the Grands Muletshad occupied 7½ hours, with very few halts; the
return was accomplished in four hours, and might have been done much faster. The
rocks were so easy, that but for the trouble of coiling up, and then again
getting out the rope, we should have hurried down without it. Some little care
was necessary, on the part of those in the rear, to avoid dislodging loose
stones, and Moore got a nasty blow on his finger from one, the effects of which
lasted for many weeks. At about one o’clock we sat down on the spot where we had
held our debate in the morning, and made the first regular meal of the day. We
now, too, broke the icicles off our beards, which had been thus fringed since 3
A.M. We observed from hence that the eastern glacier of Elbruz flows from the
same névé as the ice-streams that descend to the sources of the Baksan, and that
there was no apparent difficulty in following it into the head of the glen from
which we had originally proposed to attack the mountain. The snow was still in
good order, owing to the extreme cold, and we slid quickly down — the two
natives, though declining to be attached to our rope, gladly accepting the
suggestion that they should hold it in their hands. When ascending in our
tracks, they had seen the hole made by my disappearance in the crevasse, and the
lesson was not lost upon them.

A cloud which had formed in the valley now swept up, and enveloped us for
half-an-hour, but we found no difficulty in steering our way through the layer
of mist into bright sunshine. We arrived at the bivouac to find that Paul had
already left with the baggage, and we soon followed, leisurely descending the
steep slopes beside the icefall. The stream, which yesterday burst from the foot
of the glacier, had changed its source, and to-day spurted in a jet from the top
of a bank of ice. The heat of the afternoon had swollen its waters, and we found
some difficulty in crossing them. The two natives had arrived before us, and
told their story to their companions and the shepherds, who, having made up
their minds that we should never be seen again, were surprised and seemingly
pleased to welcome us, not only safe but successful. On our appearance in camp
we had to submit to the congratulations of the country, offered in their usual
form of hugging and kissing. 

*August 1st.* — We were too stiff, after our long exposure to cold, to rest very
easily, and were ready to start on our return to Uruspieh at an early hour. Our
men, however, had other plans, and we found that they meant to kill and eat a
sheep before leaving. Wishing to take our time on the road, we left them to
follow; but I no sooner attempted to walk than one of my ankles became painful,
as if it had been badly sprained, and I was therefore obliged to stop, and mount
one of the horses we had brought up from the village. The pain and stiffness, no
doubt resulting from the cold, gradually wore off, and I was glad to dismount
halfway. The train of porters overtook us about an hour out of Uruspieh, and we
walked in together. I never saw better walkers than these Tartars, not only on a
hillside, but — what is even more remarkable amongst mountaineers — upon flat
ground. They gave us a start, and caught us up easily in the ascent of Elbruz,
and now, when Tucker, wishing to try their mettle, put on a spurt across the
meadow, they walked with apparent case at a pace of five miles an hour, and soon
caused our friend to repent the trial of speed he had rashly provoked. These men
are the raw material out of which Caucasian guides will have to be made, and, if
the great language difficulty could be overcome, there is no reason why they
should not, with a little practice in ice-craft, become first rate companions for
a traveller wanting to explore the glaciers of this part of the chain.

We entered Uruspieh, and reached the guest-house almost unobserved; but we had
not been there many minutes before our native companions spread the news of our
return, and a crowd of excited villagers flocked into the room. Several minutes
passed before the story was fully understood: our burnt faces, and the
partially-blinded eyes of the two men who had accompanied us, were visible signs
that we had in truth spent many hours on the snowfields, and the circumstantial
account and description of the summit given by the porters seemed to create a
general belief in the reality of the ascent. The scene was most entertaining.
The whole male population of the place crowded round us to shake hands, each of
our companions found himself a centre of attraction, and the air rang with
❛Allah❜ - seasoned phrases of exclamation and astonishment, mingled, as each
newcomer entered, and required to hear the tale afresh, with constant
reiterations of ❛Minghi-Tau!❜ — a familiar name, which sounds far more grateful
to my ear than the heavy-syllabled Elbruz.

We underwent a crossfire of questionings as to what we had found on the top, and
had sorrowfully to confess that we had seen nothing of the gigantic cock who
lives up aloft, and is said to salute the sunrise by crowing and flapping his
wings, and to prevent the approach of men to the treasure he is set to guard, by
attacking intruders with his beak and talons. We could not even pretend to have
had an interview with the giants and genii believed to dwell in the clefts and
caverns of Elbruz, concerning one of whom Haxthausen relates the following
legend :— ❛An Abkhasian once went down into the deepest cavern of the mountain,
where he found a powerful giant, who said to him, "Child of man of the upper
world, who hast dared to come down here, tell me how the race of man lives in
the world above? Is woman still true to man? Is the daughter still obedient to
the mother?" The Abkhasian answered in the affirmative, whereat the giant
gnashed his teeth, groaned, and said, “Then must I still live on here with sighs
and lamentation!"❜ The giant lost an opportunity when I was in the crevasse; for
had he then put the same questions to me, an old ❛Saturday Review❜ might have
been found in my pocket, the perusal of a famous article in which would have
clearly justified him in considering his period of punishment at an end.

The princes, of course, came to talk the expedition over with us, and seemed
much struck by what they heard of the use we had made of our mountaineering
gear, of which they had before scarcely comprehended the purpose. Hamzet’s
enthusiasm was boundless; he strolled in and out perpetually, repeating each
time the magic word ❛Minghi-Tau!❜ — till at last he achieved an astonishing
linguistic feat, and showed at the same time a surprising acquaintance with the
manners of Western Europe, by confidentially suggesting, ❛Minghi-Tau, — London,
champagne fruhstuck, karasho.❜ He had evidently not been in the Russian service
for nothing.

We went to bed with a weight off our minds, feeling that, come now what might,
the three great objects of our journey — the ascents of Kazbek and Elbruz, and
the establishment of a high-level route between them — were fully accomplished.
Conscious virtue now proposed to reward itself, and after a month of hard work,
poor living, and no accommodation, attended at times by considerable anxiety as
to the successful issue of our projects, we looked forward with pleasure to a
period of enjoyment of the luxuries of civilisation at Pätigorsk, the
watering-place of the Northern Caucasus.

*August 2nd.* — We had naturally imagined that, with the friendly aid of the
princes at our back, we should have no difficulty in procuring horses to ride
down the two days’ journey to Piitigorsk. Such, however, was not the case; the
old leaven of covetousness, which seems inherent in the Caucasian mountaineer,
again came to the surface; the price asked was absurd, and the arrangements were
further complicated by the necessity of making a bargain with two or three men,
owing to no single peasant having sufficient horses for our whole party. The
princes possessed influence, though no authority, and by their aid an
arrangement was finally concluded. We were asked by several of the wealthier
villagers, and received a formal application from one of the princes’ servants,
to know if we had any coins or silver pieces with us, that we would exchange for
Russian paper. In this country every man is his own banker, and either carries
his balance on his person, melted into the form of gold ornaments for his belt
or dagger-sheath, or else hangs it in a row of gold coins on his wife’s
forehead. The day was superb, but we were too lazy to go up a hill, even for the
sake of seeing Elbruz.

*August 3rd.* — Our start was to have been early, but, as usual, delay arose
from various causes. We were anxious to acknowledge the hospitality shown to us,
but the means at our disposal were limited; at last we determined to quiet our
consciences, when our hosts came to see us off, by presenting a compressible
drinking-cup to Ismail, the eldest brother. We were on the point of departure,
when the princess, his sister, sent down a servant with a special request
(translated to us apologetically by Paul), that we would leave behind for her
use an article of toilet, one of the very few we possessed, which she had seen
and admired. The princess’s wish was of course gratified, and the object on
which she had set her affections — a large bath-sponge — was yielded up to her.

Two of the princes presented us with their cartes-devisite, taken at Pätigorsk,
and accepted ours in return; then, after exchanging hearty farewells, we left
Uruspieh behind us, and took the road leading down the valley. Our course lay
along the banks of the Baksan for the whole day, during which (between 8.30
A.M.and 9.30 P.M.) we accomplished a distance of fifty miles — a good ride, on
native saddles, for men who had not been on horseback for weeks; but the
excellence of the road aided us much in getting through the day’s work. The
valley of the Baksan, as yet the most visited in the Caucasus, is also the
dullest, and its scenery cannot, by any stretch of courtesy, be called either
grand or beautiful. For some distance below Uruspieh, the valley preserves the
same general character and direction; the riversides are cultivated, and
farmhouses are seen every half-hour; the lower slopes of the mountains are
scantily wooded with firs. A narrow gorge, from the upper end of which the
traveller obtains his last and finest view of Tungzorun, leads into a wide green
basin, hemmed in on the north by cliffs, the tawny hue and bold outlines of
which reminded us of pictures of Sinaitic scenery. The landscape was for a time
perfectly bare. On the right, in recesses of the hills, we passed two villages,
from one of which a low pass leads over into the valley of the Tchegem, the next
tributary of the Terek on the east. The path then enters o second defile, longer
and more picturesque than the first, and rendered pleasing to the eye by
abundant vegetation, which suddenly succeeds to the utter bareness of the glen
above. We thought a hamlet at its lower extremity would be our journey’s end,
but found there was still a ride of some hours before us.

After crossing the river twice, by new and solidly-built bridges, the track
leads across a wide grassy plain, surrounded by ridges which no longer deserve
the name of mountains. Copious springs of the clearest water burst out of the
ground, and nourished a tall and rank herbage, the home of myriads of insects,
which persecuted most cruelly both our horses and ourselves. A perfect plague of
horseflies swarmed around us, and the backs of our coats were so thickly covered
with the insects that the cloth was scarcely visible. At the lower end of this
plain a considerable tributary joins the Baksan, on the left, and close to the
junction stands a group of old tombs, concerning which the natives tell numerous
legends. After wading the tributary, we had still a long stretch of cornland to
traverse, before reaching Ataschkutan, As night came on, and the moon rose, the
coolness, and relief from our insect tormentors, were very pleasant. At last
lights appeared, and we rode along the outskirts of a large and scattered
village, composed of low houses, each standing apart from its neighbour, and
surrounded by its own garden.

We had now entered the country of the Tcherkesses, the most famous tribe of the
Caucasus, from whom the whole mountainous region between the Black and Caspian
Seas is often vaguely, and very incorrectly, called Circassia. We were to lodge
at the prince’s house, situated at the farther end of the village, within an
enclosure surrounded by barns and outbuildings. The interior bore witness to
Russian influence. For the first time since leaving Kobi, we found chairs and
tables, knives and forks, and other luxuries of Western life; indeed, the room
we slept in would have been perfectly European in its appearance, but for the
illuminated texts of the Koran hung up against the walls. The prince was a
good-looking youth, of apparently less than average intelligence; in our case,
at least, he meddled only to muddle. Our horsemen, dissatisfied with the bargain
the Uruspieh princes had led them into, struck for higher pay, which we refused
to give, trusting, somewhat rashly, to find others without difficulty. In the
morning the prince seemed unable to give us any help, and declared there were no
horses unemployed, an assertion which was hardly uttered when we saw a drove of
at least two hundred on the opposite bank of the river.

A peasant having offered to provide a bullock-cart and one horse to take us to
Zonitzki, the nearest post-station, forty versts off, we accepted his offer as
the simplest means of escape from our difficulty, and set out in this novel
style. The road led for many miles over rolling hills, which, but for the
luxuriant herbage with which they were covered, might have been taken for part
of the South Downs of Sussex, the level steppe in front looking from a distance
not unlike the sea. To the south we had occasional glimpses, through the clouds,
of the snowy chain we were leaving. Our progress was delayed by the breakdown of
the cart, which its owner happily succeeded in exchanging for another we found
on the road. Now up and now down, we traversed for hours the same description of
country, passing between meadows of gigantic weeds, amongst which the wild
sunflower had the pre-eminence. Lunch took place, under the shadow of the cart,
beside a muddy brook, the only water we saw for miles. Our progress throughout
the day was of the slowest description; one of us rode the horse in turn; the
others either walked or took lifts in the bullock-cart, which creaked slowly
along at about two miles an hour. We had one good laugh to relieve the dulness
of the ride. Francois, whose notions of horsemanship are practical but not
scientific, was about to mount the horse, when he felt that the stirrup was
weak. He met the difficulty without hesitating for a moment, by going round to
the other side and mounting with the left leg foremost, consequently with his
face to the tail. This result, however, had been foreseen, and, with a dexterity
for which we were unprepared, the rider wriggled himself round in the saddle,
quite unconscious of the amusement his proceedings had afforded to the party in
the cart.

As we drew near the river Malka the hills sank, and the country became well
cultivated, the grain principally grown being a kind of spelt. The view was very
striking from the brow above the slight descent to the ford. On the river-bank
was a large Tcherkess village, and before us a vast plain — golden in parts with
uncut corn, dotted in others with the small ricks into which the peasants first
heap it — stretched to the horizon. A group of bold hills rose like islands in
the distance, in the loftiest of which we at once recognised Beschtau (4,594
feet), an isolated summit rendered famous by several of the early travellers in
this country, and not far distant from our goal — Pätigorsk. Only ten versts now
intervened between us and Zonitzki, the green-cupola’d church of which marked
its position long before we reached it. There was no difficulty in obtaining
❛troikas,❜ though there was no regular posthouse, and the functions of head of
the post were exercised by the village schoolmaster. Excited at our gradual
return to civilisation, and at the discovery of a shop, we rashly ordered a
bottle of wine, but failed in the attempt to swallow the vinegar which bore the
name. While our carts (the too well-remembered ❛paraclodnaia❜) were being
prepared, we sat in a farmyard, where we were entertained with tea and bread by
a funny old Russian woman, whose life seemed troubled by her pigs — lean and
hungry beasts, that gathered round us in a circle, waiting to pick up the crumbs
of our repast.

The red and purple tints of a gorgeous sunset were slowly fading away, and the
symmetrical form’ of Beschtau stood out, as a dark mass against the lustrous
sky, as we left Zonitzki. Before the light was too far gone, we caught sight of
Elbruz looming indistinctly, like a huge pale shadow, on the southern horizon.
As the twilight grew deeper the moon rose, and lighted us on our way across the
grassy steppe. In spite of the jolting, we dozed for three hours at the bottom
of the cart, and were only aroused by finding ourselves in the broad street of a
village we at first thought to be Pätigorsk; it was, however, only its suburb,
the Cossack ❛stanitza❜ of Goriatchevodsk. No bridge crosses the stony bed of the
Podkumok, a tributary of the Kuma, one of those streams which contradict the
poet’s assertion, that 

:::: { .margin-left-xl .fs-xs }
| Even the weariest river
| Winds somewhere safe to sea,
::::

by perishing miserably in the vast steppe which stretches inland from the
north-western shores of the Caspian. We drove slowly through the ford, gazing
with wondering eves at what looked to us, unused to any building larger than a
Tartar ❛aoul,❜ the temples and palaces covering the opposite hillside. Our
driver, lashing his horses into a final spurt, galloped up a street lined with
two-storied European houses, past dozens of shop-signs, and then round a sharp
corner, where the blue domes of the cathedral, surmounted by chain-hung crosses
of gold, glistened in the moonlight. To our astonishment the horses turned into
the courtyard of a massive building with an Ionic portico, and we found that
this palatial pile was the hotel. Never probably before this night had such a
queer-looking crew demanded admission of Mademoiselle Caruta, the daughter of
the worthy Italian who owns the establishment. With a discrimination which did
her great credit, she recognised at once our true character, showed us rooms,
and suggested, in Circean tones, that we should probably like some supper. It
was 11 P.M., and we had thought that our travelworn garments would not be
exposed to public gaze till the next morning, when we might in some degree have
furbished them up. To our surprise the restaurant was crowded with Russian
officers in full uniform (when are they not?) and, worse still, ladies in
evening costumes. Dazzled by the blaze of candles and looking-glasses, and
puzzled by the profusion of good things suddenly placed at our disposal, we
retired hastily to the nearest table, and having ordered our food, tried to look
as if we were not conscious of being dusty, travel-stained, and about the colour
of Red Indians.

The contrast, characteristic of Russia, between an excess of luxury and a lack
of the commonest articles of civilisation, is seen in its most exaggerated form
in the Caucasian provinces. As we sat surrounded by all the luxuries of
civilisation, and supplied, by assiduous waiters, with delicately cooked dishes
and brimming glasses, from which the champagne flowed gratefully down our
throats, the adventures of the past four weeks seemed to us as a tale that is
told, and we could scarcely believe how short a time before high sheep’s brains
had been regarded as a delicacy, and a pair of shooting-boots and a revolver as
a luxurious pillow.

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1100]: [Quite unconnected with Uschkul, the collective name of the highest group of hamlets in Suanetia, of which Jibiani is one.]{.footnote}

[^1101]: [Any mountaineers who visit the Caucasus are likely to go to Uruspieh, and I may therefore, while on the subject of the routes leading to it, suggest an expedition which, in point of interest and fine scenery, would, I am sure, repay a mountaineer, and is very unlikely to prove impracticable, or even difficult. It is to ascend the valley opening due south of the village, and, turning to the right from its head, effect a pass over the glaciers into the glen, the torrent of which joins the Baksan halfway between Uruspieh and its source.]{.footnote}
