# CHAPTER XII.<br /><small> PÄTIGORSK AND THE TCHEREK VALLEY. </small>{#twelve .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
The Caucasian Spas — Their History and Development — View  from Michoucha — The
Patients — Essentuky — Kislovodsk — The  Narzan — Hospitable Reception — A Fresh
Start — A Russian Farmhouse — By the Waters of Baksan — Naltschik — The Tcherek
— Camp in the Forest — A Tremendous Gorge — Balkar — A Hospitable Sheikh — The
Mollah — Gloomy Weather — A  Solemn  Parting — Granitic Cliffs — Karaoul — A
Mountain Panorama — Sources of the Tcherek — The Stuleveesk Pass — Koschtantau
and Dychtan — A Noble Peak — Our Last Camp.
<br /><br />
::::


*August 5th to 9th.* — We spent five days very pleasantly in resting from our
fatigues, and enjoying the good things brought within our reach in the Caucasian
Capua, of which I must now give some account. The history of the mineral waters
to which Pätigorsk owes its existence is curious, as illustrating the state of
the country during the last century, and the gradual steps by which the Russian
conquests have been extended and consolidated. In 1717 the court-physician of
Peter the Great reported on the rumoured existence of mineral springs in the
country of the Tcherkesses, but no Russian could then visit them. In 1780 the
fortress of Constantinogorsk was established, four versts from the present site
of Pätigorsk, to check the constant raids of the Tcherkesses.

Klaproth visited the sulphur-springs in 1807, and gives a vivid and amusing
description of the troubled lives led by the poor patients at that time. During
the day the bathers sojourned in huts built round the source, which was
conducted into a clumsily-hewn basin, capable of containing six persons at a
time. At night they returned to the adjacent fortress, under the escort of a
strong armed force; for the country was still kept in alarm by continual raids
of the Tcherkesses, who found the trade of catching and obtaining ransoms for
prisoners as lucrative as the Neapolitan brigands do at the present day. As the
historian of the waters naively remarks, it is easy to imagine that, perfect
repose of mind being an essential part of the cure, the patients did not benefit
by it as much as they might have done under more favourable circumstances.
Still, despite all hindrances, the popularity of the springs increased, and so
early as 1811, two hundred Russian families were drawn together to the spot.

In 1812, an employé at Constantinogorsk built the two first houses on the site
where Pätigorsk now stands. In 1529 the transfer of the official portion of the
population of Georgievsk to Stavropol gave a new impulse to the growth of
Pätigorsk, which received many of the former inhabitants of Georgievsk, a town
in an unhealthy situation, only occupied on account of its supposed strategic
importance. In 1819 the first regular bath-house was erected. Between this date
and 1830, the town as it now stands was created — partly by imperial ukases and
grants, partly by the favour and influence of successive governors of the
province. It was during this period that the hotel, the public gardens, the
bath-buildings, and the roads in the neighbourhood, were for the most part
constructed. In 1837 the Emperor Nicholas visited the Caucasus, and made an
annual grant of 8,000 roubles for the maintenance and improvement of the bathing
establishment.

Pätigorsk is the centre of the group of mineral springs, and the point on which
the Government has concentrated its efforts to create a a national
bathing-place, worthy to rank with those of Western Europe. It is not, however,
the only spot where mineral springs have been brought within the reach of the
invalids; the ❛Eaux minerales du Caucase❜ comprehend three other groups of
sources — Geleznovodsk, ferruginous springs; Essentuky, alkaline; and
Kislovodsk, acidulated carbonic. Our visit to the two latter I shall presently
have occasion to describe. Geleznovodsk we did not see; it lies at some distance
north of the others, and nearer the base of Beschtau; on the road to it, the
colony of Karras, once inhabited by Scotch missionaries, is passed. The
threatened extinction of the original stock led to the introduction of some
German Lutherans, between whom and the Scotch such internal feuds arose, that
the Government withdrew their support from the mission. In 1858 there was only
one living representative of the original colonists, named Galloway.

Pätigorsk itself is one of the most curious phenomena of the Caucasus, and its
incongruities were perhaps more apparent to us, coming upon it, as we did, fresh
from the mountains. The first feature about the place that strikes one with
surprise is, that, though standing far away from the last swells of the great
range, in the centre of a bare and featureless plain, it yet contrives to be
pretty. Its attractions are due to its position on the side of a lofty isolated
hill, Machoucha by name, which has been planted of late years with wood. The
Podkumok flows round the southern base of the hill, on the lower slopes of which
the town is built; the hotel and best quarter are sufficiently high to command
from their windows a noble panorama of the snowy chain — from Elbruz, standing
out like a sentinel on the west, to the more distant summits of Dychtan and
Koschtantau, on the east. The distance to Elbruz is about the same as that of
Mont Blanc from Geneva; the other mountains are from twenty to forty miles
further away. The principal bathhouses, and the gardens which surround them, are
situated in a sheltered hollow on the side of Machoucha. A long boulevard,
shaded by a double avenue of trees, which have already reached a very tolerable
size, leads up to the bathbuildings: the gardens are well laid-out, provided
with numerous seats, and adorned with summer-houses, and some curious statues
with Greek inscriptions found in the country. Nothing can exceed the cleanliness
and comfort of the baths, those appropriated to the ladies being, with a
thoughtful consideration for the weakness of the sex, even provided with large
looking-glasses. On one side of a grotto, just behind the public library and
reading-room stands a brazen tablet, on which is recorded the expedition of
General Emmanuel to the foot of Elbruz in 1829, the attempt and failure of the
German savants to reach the top, and the supposed success of Killar in doing so.
The story is, of course, written in Russian characters; we asked our companion,
Dr. Smirnov, the head-physician, what it meant, and his reply was, ❛Bah! c’est
une bétise.❜ Our own reasons for doubting Elbruz having found its Jacques Balmat
in Killar, I have entered into elsewhere.^[^1200]^

The ridge which forms the southern boundary of the hollow in which the baths are
situated is of a very extraordinary character. According to Dr. Smirnov, whose
theory was certainly confirmed by the appearance of the surface, it has been
entirely formed by the deposit of the sulphur-springs during past ages. The
handsomest building connected with the waters is the Elizabeth Gallery, a long
arcade, from beneath the arches of which a fine view of the town and the plain
below is obtained. A zigzag path, shaded by thick oak copses, has been made to
the top of Machoucha (3,258 feet), whither we climbed one cloudless morning, and
enjoyed a perfect view of the great chain, from Kazbek, the crest of which was
just distinguishable among the slanting rays of the newly-risen sun, to the
doubleheaded Elbruz. The ugly little molehill, called the Yutskaia Gora, which
from the town cuts off some of the lower portion of the mountain, is completely
sunk, and the whole 8,000 feet of unbroken snowslope, falling towards the valley
of the Mulka, exposed to view. The monarch of Caucasian and European mountains
brooks no rivalry; clothed in his wide-spreading ermine mantle, he stands forth
a burly but not undignified sovereign, taller by the head and shoulders than any
of his neighbours. The sharper peaks of Dychtau and Koschtantau are so distant
that none but a trained eye is likely to appreciate their real height and
beauty, and few who had not known them before would have noticed the twin
summits of Uschba shooting up, keen as ever, over the intervening ranges. On the
north, Beschtau was of course conspicuous; elsewhere the prospect extended over
a boundless steppe, dotted by isolated mounds like the ❛tells❜ of the Syrian
desert.

A carriage-road has been lately completed round the base of Machoucha, forming a
pleasant afternoon’s drive for Pätigorsk society. We followed it as far as the
sulphur-spring, called by Russians ❛The Proval.❜ It is a natural grotto of the
form of an inverted funnel, at the bottom of which is a deep well of
sulphur-water. A Moscow merchant, who had benefited by the Pätigorsk springs,
rendered the grotto accessible, by having a passage cut to it through the
hillside at his own expense. Owing to its distance from the town, and the
similarity of the water to others nearer at hand, it is now little used.

The hours kept by the patients are very remarkable, They dine from 12 to 4 P.
M., and sup from 8 P.M. to 1 A.M.; but despite, or rather perhaps because of,
their dissipated hours, they look as sick and miserable a collection of men as
one often sees. Their days are spent in drinking the waters and taking baths, or
dawdling about the gardens smoking cigarettes, and listening to the strains of
military music. At the time of our visit the ❛Mabel Waltz❜ was the latest
musical novelty in the Caucasus, and seemed to be very popular. The attractions
of the town are not great; it consists, besides the boulevard and the villas on
the hillside above it, of one long straggling street, and a shopquarter put down
on a dusty slope, with half-finished arcades ending in bare open spaces, after
the untidy fashion common in Russia.

We occupied our time in roaming about the bazaar, and laying in stores for
another week in the mountains, and occasionally went into the fruit-market to
buy one of the huge water-melons which form the staple article of food of the
people of the country. The discovery of a photographer afforded us some
amusement, as the enterprising artist had been as far as Uruspieh, and had taken
stereoscopic views on the road, many of which we were glad to purchase. On the
whole, the attractions of Pätigorsk, to a passing traveller, are quickly
exhausted; but our stay was rendered exceptionally pleasant by the kindness of
Dr. Smirnov, the resident physician in charge of the bathing establishments, who
bears the, to English ears, odd-sounding title of civil-general. On our calling
at his house, Dr. Smirnov told us that he had already heard from St. Petersburg
of our probable visit, and had expected us for some weeks. 

To the bathers Pätigorsk is, I fear, sometimes slow, and the Government will
scarcely succeed in their desire to attract hither any large portion of the
crowd of Russians who annually visit the German Spas, until it possesses not
only railway communication with Central Russia, but also the gambling-tables,
which are apparently necessary, as a mental fillip, to the complete success of
all water-cures. The weather during our stay was continuously cloudless; night
and morning the serrated array of the Caucasus invited us to return into its
recesses. Pätigorsk, owing to its position on a southern slope, is decidedly a
hot place; and the constant sunshine drove many of the invalids and all the
visitors to Kislovodsk, where a short course of the waters is generally
prescribed after the sulphur-springs have Lad their effect. Dr. Smirnov proposed
that we should make a day’s excursion to Kislovodsk, a suggestion we were glad
to adopt, more especially as all trouble was taken off our hands by the kind
loan of the doctor’s open carriage. Moore was, unfortunately, too unwell to
accompany us: but Tucker and I set out, at 5 A.M., on the morning of the 7th,
with four horses harnessed abreast, in the usual Russian fashion.

The road (I speak as a Russian) is simply a portion of the steppe where
carriages ordinarily pass. It leads through a military cantonment, a row of tidy
cottages surrounded by huge sunflowers, and then strikes across the plain in a
south-westerly direction towards a green oasis already visible in the distance.
On the north the symmetrical form of Beschtau is more than usually conspicuous;
its loftiest summit is surrounded by four minor ones, so that, from every point
of view, the mountain bears the same appearance, and may be compared to a
Russian church with its four small cupolas clustering round the central dome. In
the opposite direction, the snowy heads of Elbruz are constantly in sight, over
the lower ridges that bound the plain on the south. It is seventeen versts from
Pätigorsk to Essentuky, formerly a frontier-post, then a Cossack ❛stanitza,❜ and
now a bathing-place. The most has been made of an unpicturesque situation, by
planting the ground round the springs, and laying out winding walks under the
trees. The morning band was playing at the time of our arrival, and we met
numerous patients rambling about the park, through which we ourselves strolled.
The character of the landscape changes, and the road enters a shallow valley,
where the Podkumok flows between low rounded hills, broken here and there by
projecting masses of white rock. The country is covered with green pasturage,
but entirely bare of trees. The ruins of old fortifications, still visible here
and there on the flat hilltops, are records of the long period during which this
was debateable ground between the Cossack and Tcherkess. We met on the way the
omnibus which, for the convenience of patients, performs a daily journey between
Kislovodsk aud Pätigorsk, and *vice versa*. The ❛stanitza❜ of Kislovodsk, with
its green-domed church, is left behind on the right, and the road, quitting the
valley of the Podkumok, crosses a low hill, and soon descends to the baths,
which have grown up round the most famous spring of the Caucasus. Kislovodsk is
thirteen versts beyond Essentuky, and is situated in a narrow glen surrounded by
low hills, which deprive it of any extended view; it owes its only claims to
beauty to the rich vegetation with which the care of successive governors, aided
by the natural fertility of the soil, has endowed it. A fine avenue of poplars
leads up to the baths; the wood beyond consists chiefly of acacias.

We were driven to the ❛Hotel de la Couronne,❜ kept by the same manager as the
hotel at Pätigorsk, where we found Dr. Smirnov, who proposed that we should at
once visit the baths. The building which now covers the famous Narzan is in a
style very far in advance of what one would expect to find in so remote a
position. It owes much to the care of the late Prince Woronzoff, the general
benefactor of Southern Russia, whose works and name are equally remembered at
Tiflis, Odessa, and in the Crimea. The centre of the entrance-hall is occupied
by an hexagonal basin ten feet in diameter, in approaching which a slight
fizzing sound reaches the ear. This proceeds from the great spring, which bursts
out of the ground with astonishing force, and is dignified by the Tcherkess name
of the Narzan, or ❛Giant’s draught.❜ The whole surface of the basin is in a
constant state of effervescence, owing to the escape of the carbonic acid gas,
and its appearance resembles nothing so much as a gigantic goblet of very
effervescent seltzer-water. A long arcade, open on the south to the sunshine,
offers a promenade to the patients; the baths occupy portions of the same
building, and there is a small swimming-bath, with numerous separate ones, in
all of which the arrangements are of the best description. We took advantage of
Dr. Smirnov’s proposal that we should test the effects of the waters; he warned
us to keep our heads well above the surface, a precaution necessary, from the
quantity of carbonic acid evolved. We found our dip both invigorating and
appetising, and returned quite prepared to do justice to the sumptuous lunch
provided by the doctor, who, however, annexed one condition to the entertainment
— that in the matter of drinks we should obey implicitly his prescription. This
proved to be o mixture of champagne and the water of the Narzan, a preparation
requiring skill, principally, in maintaining the just proportions.

The park — which, owing to its shade and coolness, makes Kislovodsk a favourite
summer resort with all the officials of Cis-Caucasia, and even with those of
Tiflis — had next to be visited. The first person we met was an old
acquaintance, General Orlovski, the Governor of Tiflis, from whom we had parted
at Kazbek posthouse; we were still more surprised to see with him Prince Ismail
of Uruspieh, whose talents as a musician make his assistance valuable in the
concerts which often take place here. We failed to discover precisely on what
footing he stood with the Russian officers, but the impression left on our minds
was, that the invitation he received amounted to a command, and that the Prince
met with little superfluous courtesy from the habitués of the baths, to whose
amusement he was invited to contribute. 

The little stream which flows through the bottom of the glen is liable to sudden
floods, and, despite the embankments by which it is restrained, had lately broken
loose, and done considerable damage. We were shown over a botanical garden,
where the gardener cut and presented to us a beautiful bouquet of flowers. The
walks through the woods extend, on either bank of the stream, for at least a
mile above the Hotel; they are nicely kept, and deliciously cool in hot weather.
For those who do not require sulphur-baths, I have no doubt that Kislovodsk is a
far more enjoyable summer retreat than Pätigorsk.

We had heard at Pätigorsk that General Loris-Melikov, the military governor of
Cis-Caucasia, was staying at Kislovodsk, and we were anxious to call on him, to
obtain such aid and advice as he could give in carrying out our plans for the
next fortnight. In one of the detached cottage villas, built for the
accommodation of visitors (as the ❛Hotel de la Couronne,❜ in fact nothing more
than a handsome restaurant, contains no bedrooms) we found the General. An
Armenian by birth, he is one of the numerous instances of the success attained
in foreign service by that clever nation, which, like the Greek, seems capable
of doing well everywhere except at home. We were received very courteously, my
maps were soon spread out, and we pointed out the route we wished to take. Our
plans were afterwards so fully carried out that I may here repeat, for the
benefit of my readers, what was then explained to the General.

We had selected Naltschik, a small town and military post at the foot of the
mountains, distant some eighty versts from Pätigorsk, as our new base of
operations; thence we desired to push up the eastern arm of the Tcherek (to be
distinguished from the better-known Terek, of which it is a tributary), and
cross from its head, by a pass, called ❛Per Stuleveesk❜ in the map, to the
headwaters of the Uruch, the valley into which we had already looked down from
the icefall of the Karagam glacier. After following this river for some
distance, we proposed to turn, by a track crossing low spurs, to Ardonsk, the
second station on the post-road on this side of Vladikafkaz. Our object in
adding this supplementary piece to the programme with which we left England, was
to gain some knowledge of the scenery and geography of the great mountain-group
under the southern face of which we had rambled in Eastern Suanetia. Viewed on
the map, this group appeared to resemble in shape the letter T, the top bar
being represented by the watershed, from a point above Jibiani to Tau Tötönal,
and the downstroke by a gigantic spur, in which are situated the second and
third summits of the Caucasus — Koschtantau and Dychtau.

Had not what we had already accomplished been known, our wish to penetrate the
recesses of the mountains would not have been so easily believed, and greater
difficulties might probably have been suggested. The most useful piece of
information we obtained was that the Stuleveesk Pass was practicable for horses
— a very important fact, as it obviated the necessity of again encumbering
ourselves with a troop of porters, and suggested the pleasing possibility of
hiring horses at Naltschik for the whole journey to Ardonsk. The General kindly
promised to write to Naltschik, and tell the Commandant there to expect us,and
to take care that horses were forthcoming on our arrival. He also wrote to his
subordinate at Pätigorsk to help us in hiring a carriage for the drive to
Naltschik, the direct road between the two places not being furnished with
posthorses. We took leave well satisfied with the result of our interview,
though our minds were slightly troubled by a spectre raised by something the
General had said about providing us with a ❛specialist,❜ who would tell us where
to go and where not to go, a kind of Mentor who would have found himself sadly
out of place in our party. The threatened companion, however, perhaps
fortunately for himself, was never assigned us.

Our carriage, which was awaiting our return to the hotel, took us quickly back
to Pätigorsk. The hurry of our driver caused the only mischance of the day. Dr.
Smirnov had told us that General Chodzko (who, it will be remembered, is the
head of the Russian Survey which executed the Five Verst Map, and who had shown
us much civility at Tiflis) was staying at Essentuky. Our coachman had been, as
we believed, instructed to take us to the General’s lodgings, and as he drove
on, we assumed that the house must be at the Pätigorsk end of the scattered
village; it was not till we were fairly beyond the place that we discovered he
had no intention of stopping at all. Our ignorance of Russian made the mistake
irreparable, and we much regretted thus to have lost the opportunity of talking
over our experiences with one of the few Russians who have any real knowledge of
the interior of the Caucasian chain.

On the following morning, the military commandant of Pätigorsk called, and
proffered his assistance in any arrangements we might wish to make. Paul and the
officer’s servant set off together to find a carriage-master and make an
agreement with him; but we did not gain much from the aid of the military, as
the price asked was exorbitant, and we could obtain no abatement. The 8th was
spent in replenishing our exhausted stores with such articles as the bazaar
could supply s but, beyond the most, commonplace necessaries, we found little in
the shops except sweetmeats, which existed in every variety, from the wooden box
of ❛rahat-lakoum❜ to the gilded case of Moscow candied fruits. If the supply for
sale is any index to the amount consumed, the baths must have a wonderful
effect, not only in sharpening the appetites of the inhabitants of Pätigorsk for
sweet things, but also in strengthening their digestions.

*August 9th.* — In order to avoid the heat of a drive across the steppe in the
burning sunshine, we did not set out till four o’clock in the afternoon. During
the day the aspect of the weather had changed, and the sky, hitherto unclouded
during our stay, was hidden by dark masses of vapour, which, shortly before the
time fixed for our start, discharged themselves in pouring rain. The turn of
affairs was not pleasant, but we found consolation in the thought that we might
have been worse off, and that, in such weather, a watertight ❛tarantasse❜ was
luxury compared to an open ❛telega.❜ Bidding farewell once more to civilisation,
we drove out into the desolate and now muddy steppe. In no other European
country but Russia is the transition from the comforts and even luxuries of the
towns to the barbaric lack of roads, bridges, and every necessary of
intercourse, in the country, so marked. No Russian poet could have written, ❛God
made the country, but man made the town,❜ for such a sentiment would have seemed
to his countrymen to savour of the grossest impiety. The country, at any rate in
the steppe districts of Russia, is a wide featureless plain; the road — a mere
track, converted into a sea of mud in winter, enveloped in a dust-cloud in
summer — is often rendered wholly impassable by unbridged and flooded rivers.
Some such reflections passed through our minds as, having left behind us five
minutes before the handsome rooms of the ❛Hotel de la Couronne.❜ we found
ourselves, after fording the Podkumok, plunging into the mud on its further
bank. As far as Zonitzki, we drove along the same track as that by which we had
arrived; thence we struck more to the east, and at last, after being refused
admission into one farmhouse, on the very reasonable ground that the owner had
that day buried his wife, we came to a halt, shortly before midnight, at another
on the banks of the Malka. It was inhabited by a family of colonists, kind
homely people, like most Russian peasants not connected with the postal service.
The ❛tarantasse❜ was put up in a shed in the yard, while we were introduced into
the best room of the farmhouse, which was clean and tidy, but terribly close and
hot, where we passed the short portion of the night still remaining.

*August 10th.* — At 5 A.M. we were again on the road. The sky was overcast, and
we saw nothing of the mountains all day; but the absence of oppressive heat was
a great comfort, and almost reconciled us to the loss of view. Crossing the
Malka by a bridge, the track led us over low bare hills, until the banks of the
Baksan were reached, where at a walled Cossack station, a remnant of past and
more turbulent times, we learnt, to our dismay, that the bridge had just been
carried away, by the floods caused by the previous night’s rain; it was,
however, suggested that if we could wait a couple of hours, it would probably be
made passable. In a shop opposite the station, we found a room in which we sat
down, while the ❛samovar❜ was heated, and some eggs boiled. More than the
appointed time elapsed, and yet no satisfactory intelligence came from the
bridge; we settled, therefore, to drive down and ascertain the real state of the
case, and whether it was not possible to ford the stream. We found that the
central pile of the bridge, with the roadway, had been swept clean away; and as
there seemed no prospect of a speedy repair of the damage, there was nothing to
be done but to encounter the muddy flood. After our June experiences in the
Araxes valley, this seemed to us, though a formidable, by no means a terrific
task, and we encouraged our driver, by every means in our power, to dare the
deed. He, however, did not view the matter in the same light, and entirely
refused to adventure his precious life, except under the guidance of three
Tcherkesses, who had just ridden up and offered their assistance, — for a
consideration. After some delay, a bargain was struck, and driving some little
distance up the stony river-bed, we forded successfully, though not without
serious difficulty, the first branch the second was easier, but the third was
too much for our driver’s pluck, and he flatly refused to go a yard further. We
were, therefore, obliged to unpack all our baggage, and to ride across, carrying
it on the horses of the Tcherkesses, The force of water was really formidable,
and the wiry little steeds had some difficulty to maintain their footing. Safely
landed on the further side, we had still to wait until sufficient horses could
be found, in the adjacent village, to mount us and our men. For two weary hours,
unable to leave our baggage, we sat fretting and fuming by the waters of Baksan,
until Paul at last appeared with a bullock-cart for the traps, and saddle-horses
for us.

A fresh delay now arose. The man of whom we hired the horses had prepared a meal
for us, and we found it would be a gross breach of good manners to refuse to
partake of it. We therefore entered his cottage, and, sitting down on a bench,
were served with a dish of spelt-bread and toasted cheese, which was not
unpalatable to hungry men. Though the Tcherkesses are Mahommedans, the women of
the village took small pains to cover their faces, or avoid the eyes of
strangers and infidels. They are a wellgrown race, but there was nothing in any
of their faces, except those of the very young girls, to attract a second look,
and our host’s wife, who attended on us, was a marvel of ugliness.

Having disposed of the food as quickly as propriety would permit, we jumped into
the saddle, and set off at a canter across the grassy steppe, leaving the
bullockcart to follow more leisurely, under the charge of Francois. Once on the
road, we lost no time, as our horseman was anxious to return the same night to
his home, and urged us to push on. To gallop on a Tcherkess saddle is not a very
easy or agreeable feat, but we were all tolerably successful, though I suffered
shipwreck on one occasion, from rashly opening a map — a proceeding my horse
resented with such an unexpected flourish of his heels, as to land me safely on
the grass over his head, there to continue my researches at leisure. There was
still another large river, flowing from the glaciers of the central chain,
between us and Naltschik. This was the Tchegem, the upper valley of which is
inhabited by a branch of the same Tartar race as is found at Uruspieh and
Balkar. The stream was coming down with great violence, but the frail-looking
bridge had, fortunately, not as yet been carried away, although the catastrophe
seemed imminent, and the structure was watched by a guard, who would only allow
us to pass one by one, and at a footpace.

A low range of wooded hills now bounded the steppe we had been traversing all
day, and we could see, at their feet, the buildings of Naltschik. As we drew
nearer our goal, the hitherto barren soil was covered with scrub, and thickets
of large dog-roses. The entrance to the town was a record of the old days, when
it was exposed to the constant danger of attack from the mountaineers. The
buildings had once been surrounded by a stockade, and the gateway at the
entrance to the main street was guarded by a sentry. He enquired at once if we
were the English who were expected, and despatched one of his comrades to guide
us to the quarters prepared for us. We were taken to a well-built one-storied
house, standing on one side of the open space, in the centre of the town; our
hostess proved to be the widow of a Russian officer, who was glad to let us her
front-parlour during our stay. It was a clean and cheerful room, with
fairy-roses in the windows, and pictures on the walls; but there was the common
Russian want of creature-comforts, and we could obtain nothing but our own
mattrass to lie upon.

*August 11th.* — We went oft after breakfast to call on the Commandant, who had
heard from General Loris-Melikov of our intended visit, and had detained some
natives of the Upper Tcherck, with their horses, to accompany us on our
excursion into the mountains. Our expressions of pleasure and thanks were
suddenly cut short by the announcement of the price, five roubles a day (nearly
fitteen shillings), we were expected to pay for each horse. As we were to take
eight, it was of course out of the question that we should ratify any such
arrangement but at the moment we were too completely taken by surprise to say
much; and the Commandant turned the subject, by proposing a walk in his garden,
and showing us a seat, constructed to command a view of the distant mountains,
the snowy summits of which are in clear weather visible over the lower wooded
hills. He related to us a legend, current among the Tcherkesses, of an
extraordinary treasure secreted on the top of one of these peaks, but it did not
seem different from the tales of the same description common to most mountain
countries.

It was evident that we should not be able to make a start early the next day,
and we were forced to acquiesce in the suggestion, that an officer should call
on us in the morning with the horsemen, and that the conclusion of any definite
arrangement should be postponed for the present. Naltschik in itself is a neat
little place, showing marks of its origin as a military cantonment, and
gradually sinking, under the influence of more peaceful times, into a quiet
country town, with broad streets shaded by trees, bordered by cozy-looking,
green-roofed, one-storied cottages, each surrounded by its patch of
garden-ground. There are several fairly-supplied shops, and in one Paul secured
a ham, an article we had looked for in vain at Pitigorsk; while at another, we
found, to our surprise, a bottle of very fair eau-de-cologne — a great boon to
Moore and myself, who were out of sorts, and with neuralgic tendencies.

*August 12th.* — In the morning an officer called, accompanied by the two
natives who, it was proposed, should provide us with horses. They were bluff
hearty-looking fellows, one of whom emitted, from time to time, a most ferocious
grunt, which prepossessed us, perhaps somewhat unfairly, against him. The debate
was opened by an explicit refusal, on our part, to have anything to do with any
previous understanding. The horsemen stuck to the terms originally suggested,
and thus things seemed to have come to a deadlock. An adjournment was shortly
agreed upon, and my friends accompanied the officer to the Commandant’s house,
where they spent two hours in protracted negotiations. It is very doubtful
whether their labours would have had any result, without the assistance of a
lady, the wife of one of the officers, and apparently the only person in
Naltschik who spoke any European language but Russian. By her suggestion, a
round sum was offered the men for the whole journey, and at last they agreed to
take us through the mountains to Ardonsk, with liberty to be ten days on the
road, for 130 roubles. At the rate originally suggested, we should have paid 400
roubles for exactly the same advantages. The mention of these figures will
suffice to warn future travellers, that in availing themselves of assistance
from Russian officials, they must not leave any money arrangements in their
hands, unless they are willing to risk paying three times the fair value for the
services rendered. It was past midday ere we shook hands over the bargain, and
consequently our start was deferred until the next morning, when our new
attendants promised to have the horses ready.

*August 13th.* — We set out for our ride at 6.30, after the usual difficulty in
collecting together all the animals, and we finally left with one short of the
promised number, which the men undertook to make up on our arrival at Balkar,
the collective name of the highest group of villages in the eastern branch of
the Tcherek valley. We were told it would take two days to reach Balkar, and
that, owing to the absence of shelter on the road, the first night must be spent
in the forest. The weather looked unpromising; a dull grey pall clung to the
hillsides, and blotted out half the beauties of the landscape. Naltschik is
situated on a small stream issuing from the neighbouring hills some miles west
of the Tcherek, to reach the banks of which the road crosses the shoulder of a
low cham. The ground was covered with tall coarse herbage and thickets of small
timber, mingled with wild fruit-trees, among which we noticed the pear, the
apple, the plum, and the medlar, their gnarled boughs hung with long creepers.

We came in sight of the Tcherek, where, issuing from the hills a broad rapid
river, it strikes out into the steppe, and runs through marshy ground, fairly
timbered in comparison to the barren tracts beyond. It was a desolate view, the
surrounding country being absolutely in a state of mature, and showing no traces
of the neighbourhood or care of man. Once fairly free from the hills, the river
divides into a dozen branches, and, until it joins the Terek, flows through a
dreary swamp, uninhabited except by wild boars. From the brow of a steep though
short descent, we looked down on the hamlet of Dogiyjokova, which, like most of
the Tcherkess villages of the plain, consists of a long double row of
one-storied cottages, surrounded by sheds and fenced-in gardens, calling to mind
pictures of a South-African kraal.

We halted for lunch on the bank of a stream flowing out of the range that
overlooks Naltschik. The direction of our course had now changed, and we were
riding south-west in place of south-east. A few hundred yards of level land
generally stretched between the Tcherek and the base of the hills, but once or
twice the path was forced to climb a bold bluff, breaking down abruptly in chalk
cliffs to the river. The meadows were clothed in luxuriant herbage, which, now
uncut and ungrazed, was rapidly running to seed; the ❛glossy purples❜ of the
gigantic thistleheads specially attracted our admiration, and quite justified
the Laureate in declaring that they can at times ❛outredden all voluptuous
garden-roses.❜ Occasionally a group of tall tombstones, each seven or eight feet
high, capped by a carved turban, and chiseled with a long inscription in the
language of the country, stood out above the long grass. We tried hard through
Paul to get at their history, but could learn little definite, except that they
were of considerable antiquity. A roadside tomb, recording the name and family
of the departed, must have been an object of ambition with the former
inhabitants of the country. The lower portion of the northern valleys of the
Caucasus lying beyond the mountain gorges, easily accessible from the plain, and
subject to sudden raids from the mountaineers, seems, despite its pastoral
riches, to have been left as a debateable ground alike by Russian and Tartar.
Beyond the hamlet I have mentioned, there is no dwelling-place on the Tcherek
for a full day’s journey, until the lowest village of Balkar is reached.

The hills on both sides of the river are rounded and monotonous, and the
persistent fog robbed us of any glimpse there may be, under more favourable
circumstances, of the snowy chain; so we had to be content with admiring the
fine beechwoods on the opposite bank, trusting that, as we penetrated deeper
into the mountains, the landscapes would become more striking. The scenery
assumes a different character at the point where the western Tcherek, flowing
out from amongst loftier hills, brings the tribute of the glaciers on the
western flanks of Dychtau and Koschtantau to swell the main stream. The
hillsides grow steeper and higher, and the range separating the Bulkar and
Bezeenghe valleys breaks down in a succession of most picturesquely-shaped and
thickly-wooded bluffs. The western Tcherek, a strong body of glacier-water
flowing in a narrow but deep channel, is spanned by a good bridge, beyond which
the road, after traversing marshy meadows, is forced to climb over a projecting
spur. The forest now began to change character, and there was greater variety
among the trees; the sombre foliage of pines varied the lighter shades of green,
and tall alders shot up amongst the beeches.

After crossing for the first time the eastern Tcherek, at a, most striking
point, where it flows in a cleft so narrow that a man might almost have leapt
across, we rode for half-an hour through a wood, beautiful enough to demand a
special word of admiration, even in this country of woodland scenery. The tall
trunks between which the path wound were festooned with long streamers of
creeping plants, and the lofty boughs that overarched our heads sheltered
beneath them shrubs of rhododendron and azalea, growing to greater size than any
we had yet seen. Crags jutted out from the green banks, affording a home for
delicate ferns, and moss-cradled springs trickled downshady hollows. In an
opening of the wood, we came suddenly on a round tarn fringed with grass,
reflecting on its surface the surrounding cliffs and overhanging branches. The
spot was so charming that we wanted to camp there, but our horsemen were
obstinate, and the leader, with very decisive grants, which there was no
gainsaying, told us that we should find a much better place further on. About
half-an-hour later we halted, after a ten hours’ ride, under shelter of an
overhanging rock, the black streaks on which showed that our camping-ground was
not now used as such for the first time. Our tent was quickly pitched, and Paul
set about his cookery; the horsemen unluckily discovered he was broiling some
ham, and not only shunned him for the rest of the evening, but warned him not to
pollute any of their saddles, bridles, or other equipments with his touch.

*August 14th.* — The same dull pall of cloud veiled the sky, although it hung
higher on the mountain-sides than on the day before. The valley above our
camping-ground was completely closed by precipitous cliffs, which seemed to form
a barrier against all further progress. The path — already at some height above
the Tcherek, glimpses of which could only be seen from time to time at the
bottom of a deep ravine — turned abruptly upwards, and climbed rapidly through
the forest. Having reached a height of at least 1,500 feet above the bed of the
river, it struck boldly into the heart of the gorge, circling round ravines, and
winding over the top of the perpendicular cliffs, where a fall from one’s horse
on the off-side would have led to a short roll, followed by a sensational header
of many hundred feet. The vegetation, wherever it could find room to cling on
the shelves and crannies between the precipices, was magnificent; pine and beech
still predominated, though there was a sprinkling of other foliage. The way in
which a single tree often crowned some projecting crag, where, destitute of any
apparent source of sustenance, it yet contrived to maintain a vigorous
existence, added much to the beauty of the defile. Alpine flowers now for the
first time showed themselves in company with the most delicate ferns, and even
the grandeur of the surrounding scenery could not altogether blind us to the
presence of such old friends.

We could only appreciate the magnitude of the precipices immediately below us,
when a bend in the hillside enabled us to look back on some portion of the road
already traversed; those on the opposite side were even more tremendous. Halfway
through the defile, its course is bent by a spur on the eastern side of the
river, which juts out straight across the gap, and in fact does at one spot
actually touch the opposite cliffs, leaving the water to burrow underground as
best it may. The path descends on to the saddle connecting the rocky crown of
this spur with the hillside from which it springs. This point, from its
position, commands a view both up and down the defile, to which there is nothing
similar, or in the least comparable, in the Alps. The gorge of the Tcherek is no
mere crack in the lower slopes of the mountains, like those of Pfeffers and the
Via Mala; it is rather a huge trench, dug down from their very summits to a
depth of 5,000 feet or more. Behind us forest trees clung to every available
inch of ground; looking upwards, the character of the defile was more savage.
The foaming waters of the Tcherek, crossed three times by bridges, filled the
bottom of the trench, the sides of which were perpendicular walls, succeeded by
shelves, capped in their turn by a loftier tier of precipices. The path, a mere
ladder of broken stones, brought us, by a rapid series of zigzags, to a most
extraordinary spot, where the overhanging cliffs meet, and form a natural bridge
over the river, which can barely be seen at the bottom of its deep bed. As we
looked from this spot, the torrent to all appearance plunged directly into the
bowels of the mountains, and it was impossible to discover how it found a way
out of them. The savage grandeur of the scenery here attains its height, and no
words will convey to others the impression it made on us.

Henceforth the cleverly-contrived rock-staircase which connects Balkar with the
outside world finds room — now on one side, now on the other — to creep along
the base of the cliffs at the river’s edge; at last, when the careless observer
would think it was hopelessly defeated, it crawls along the face of an
overhanging bluff, by a gallery, partly cut into the rock, partly built out from
it. This difficult passage surmounted, it leads an easier life; the mountains
draw back from the river in two grand curtains of precipice, and the basin in
which the hamlets of Balkar are situate gradually opens to the view. We now
wound over barren and disintegrated slopes, broken occasionally by stone-capped
earth-pillars, similar to those we had seen before in the Caucasus, on the
Ardon, and to the well-known examples in the Val d’Herens in Switzerland.

Before reaching the first village, which is on the left side of the valley, we
descended to and crossed the river. On an isolated crag above the houses — here,
as at Uruspieh, flat-roofed stone cabins built against the hillside — stands a
fortress, or place of refuge, which, properly defended, must have been
impregnable, except to cannon or famine. The wide upland basin, now fairly
entered on, is by nature bare and savage in its character, but has been rendered
less so by the careful system of cultivation, which has converted every
available patch of ground, not only in the valley but to a great height on the
mountainsides, into a fruitful cornfield. After the neglect of natural bounties
shown among the lazy tribes on the south of the chain, and also in the lower
portions of the very valley we were now following up, it was strange to see how
the industrious and well-to-do Moslems who dwell in these mountain fastnesses
contrive to make the waste and desolate places ❛laugh with corn,❜ thus putting
to shame the slothfulness and consequent poverty of their Christian neighbours.
We passed several hamlets on our left, and met numerous parties of men at work
in the fields, before we recrossed the stream, and, mounting a gentle cultivated
slope, entered Muchol, the village at which our horsemen wished us to stop.

We were, I believe, the first Western Europeans who had been seen in Balkar, and
our sudden appearance gave rise to no small excitement. The male population
surrounded us in the street; the womankind, being the property of Moslem lords,
were obliged to content themselves with what they could see from the
house-roofs. Their dress consists of a loose crimson robe, with a cap, from
which a row of coins hangs down over the forehead. There was certainly one
pretty face amongst them, and there may have been more, but no second
opportunity of seeing any of the beauties occurred during our stay.

The Sheikh^[^1201]^ himself, a tall venerable-looking old man, came forward to invite
us to his house, which, like all the rest, was a low one-storied building, with
a portico, supported on massive trunks, running along the whole of the front. At
one end was a small room reserved for the reception of strangers, which we were
invited to enter. It was, at first sight, a dark and comfortless-looking hole,
but the lighting of a fire and the appearance of some bright-coloured
mattrasses, which were brought for our use from the Sheikh’s apartments, made us
very contented — especially as our men were to be quartered in a separate house,
where Paul would have abundant facilities for cooking. The ❛samovar❜ soon
appeared, accompanied by a dish of cakes, made, as the Sheikh took care to
inform us, by the hands of his wives. The weather still looked so unsettled that
we did not endeavour to hurry our arrangements, and were quite content with the
prospect of spending a day in a place where we had met with so hospitable a
reception.

Shortly after our arrival, a Mollah came in to call on us. He had given up the
tunic and sheepskin of the Caucasus, and wore the turban and loose robe of an
ordinary Turk. This was explained when we learnt that he had made the Mecca
pilgrimage, and of course had acquired foreign manners on the journey. He seemed
an intelligent man, had gleaned some confused knowledge of European politics,
and knew at any rate the fact that England was reputed a staunch friend of
Turkey, which made him very civil towards us. We were surprised to learn that
the natives have so strong a dread of being made the subjects of religious
proselytism and being compelled to worship the relics and pictures of the
thousand-and-one saints of the Russian Calendar, instead of the ❛One God and
Mohammed his Prophet,❜ that they would willingly, if they saw an opportunity,
emigrate to some district still under the control of the Commander of the
Faithful. Meantime they cling tenaciously to their old faith, carry its precepts
into daily life, and observe its ceremonies. Muchol was the only place in the
Caucasus where we heard the call to prayer resound night and morning through the
village.

*August 15th.* — The weather was again gloomy, and the sun never appeared all
day. The mountain-tops being hidden, it was useless to undertake any long
expedition, and we contented ourselves with a short stroll up the hillside.
Muchol, seen from above, has a most curious appearance; the flat grass-grown
roofs of the houses, and the rough stone walls, give them more the look of a
collection of burrows than of the comfortable homes of an industrious
population. If the house in which our men were lodged was a fair specimen, the
interiors are tolerably snug. Passing through a courtyard, we entered a large
room, the walls of which were fitted with shelves, on which were ranged the
brightly-painted trays in which Easterns delight, and pegs, on which hung
sheepskins, swords aud guns, with the other necessary equipments of a Caucasian
when away from home.

All day long the Sheikh loaded us with a succession of civilities, in the very
tangible form of relays of teacakes, and a kind of beer, peculiar apparently to
these Mussulman valleys. Having finished our preparations for a sojourn of some
days in the mountains, we determined, if the weather promised well, to start
early next morning.

*August 16th.* — The clouds were more broken, and, for the first time for many
days, patches of blue sky shone through them. With daybreak came the Sheikh,
bringing in his wake a large supply of meat ❛rigsoles❜ smeared with honey, a
finishing touch we could willingly have dispensed with. Not only were we
well-feasted at the time, but, by the Sheikh’s order, a number of these dainties
were put into our provision-bag. On starting, when we had all mounted, a
beer-jug was brought out, and a stirrup-cup presented to each of us, after which
the Sheikh solemnly invoked ❛Allah!❜ to prosper our journey. Having made what
requital we could for the hospitality which had been shown us, we left Muchol,
carrying away with us pleasanter recollections of its inhabitants than of those
of any other village we had halted at. At Uruspieh we had, it is true, received
almost equal kindness; but there the princes were imbued with a tinge of Russian
manners, in contrast to which the patriarchal simplicity of Balkar was the more
striking.

We left the village by the same road we had entered it, and recrossed the river
to its right bank. We were some hundred yards beyond the bridge, when we saw a
horseman, conspicuous by a green turban and streaming purple robe, riding after
us. It was the Mollah, who, unprepared for our early start, had not been present
to wish us ❛Goodbye,❜ and now, arrayed in his best, came to repair the omission.
After an exchange of Oriental salutations and farewells, including the hearty
hand-shakings which are common alike to Tartars and Englishmen, our reverend
friend wheeled round his steed, and followed by his servant, whom we made happy
by a small present, returned home, while we pursued our journey. The path led us
through a succession of cornfields, and passed two considerable villages beyond
which a slight westerly bend in the direction of the valley hid what lay before
us. When we had turned the corner, the character of the scenery underwent a
rapid change; the cornfields and villages of the Balkar basin were left behind,
and we followed the Tcherek for many miles, through a deep and trough-shaped
valley, which almost deserved the name of a gorge. Tall granitic cliffs rose on
either side of us too steeply to admit of any glimpse being caught of the
gigantic peaks to which we knew them to serve only as foundations. The shelves
and slopes were covered with dwarf firs, but the general aspect of the scenery
was stern and savage. Barriers, formed of débris brought down by torrents
pouring out of lateral ravines, stretched across from side to side, and made as
it were steps in the valley, the level of which rises very rapidly, as it
penetrates deeper into the mountains. The landscape was more Swiss in its
character than anything we had lately seen, but, owing to the absence of
villages or chalets, it was more savage than the generality of similar Alpine
scenes. A slight turn in the course of the valley brought into view a graceful
snowpeak, rising above the fork of the two glens which contain the sources of
the Tcherek. We crossed a strong tributary flowing out of a cleft in the western
hillside, which has its birth in a glacier (invisible from below), clinging to
the cliffs of Dychtau.

Skirting the steep shelving bank of the river, we drew near the meeting of the
two torrents, immediately under the spur projecting between the glens; on the
right bank of the united streams, the mountains leave space for a broad and flat
meadow, where herds of horses and oxen were grazing. The word ❛Karaoul,❜ meaning
(Paul said) ❛guard❜ printed at this spot on the Five Verst Map, had hitherto
puzzled us, but we now learnt its purport. The pasturages at the head of the
valley feed, in summer, numerous flocks, and it is worth the while of the
community of Balkar to maintain a guard at this point, to prevent any predatory
expeditions, on the part of their southern neighbours, such as we had witnessed
in crossing the Nakra Pass. How the Mingrelians manage to find a way practicable
for cattle across the chain it is difficult to imagine, as the easiest pass must
lead over fields of snow and ice, far larger than those traversed in crossing
the St. Theodule. We convinced ourselves that the ridge between this branch of
the Tcherek and Suanetia is practically impassable; the robbers therefore must
come either from the Rion or Zenes-Squali, which both rise on the southern side
of this portion of the chain. We did not cross over to the meadow, but, after a
seven hours’ ride, halted under an overhanging cliff just below the junction of
the streams — a spot evidently frequented by the shepherds, as low walls had
been built against the rock to make the shelter more complete. Here we employed
ourselves in pitching our tent, while one of the horsemen rode off to find the
herdsmen, and obtain firewood and milk. The weather again looked unpromising,
and we began to fear we had penetrated into the heart of the mountains to no
purpose.

*August 17th.* — We had given orders that we should be called early, and the
first sound that greeted our ears was that well-known and disheartening phrase
of Swiss guides, ❛Mais il y a du brouillard.❜ The curtain of mist, that hung
only a few hundred feet over our heads, did not appear dense, so we determined
to go up the nearest hill, and trust to Providence to show us something when we
got to the top. The pass to the Uruch, which we followed the next day, crosses
the two streams above their junction, and it is at the bridge over the first
that the guardians of the flocks reside during the summer months, in a tiny
stone hut. Our first intention was to ascend the gorge of the Dychsu, as the
western branch is called on the map; but we were overcome by the pantomimic
demonstrations made by the guardians, to show the impossibility of this course,
and were induced to climb the great hillside which rose steeply on our right. We
soon reached the level of the mists, and in half-an-hour had left them far below
us, and were enjoying unclouded sunshine.

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption .break-before}
![Peak in the Tcherek Valley.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0411.jpg "Peak in the Tcherek Valley."){#b411}
::::

After a long and severe climb of 3,000 feet, up grassy slopes broken by crags
and ravines, and covered in places with Caucasian rhododendrons, we gained the
brow of a spur, whence we had a panorama of the ranges surrounding us worthy to
be compared with the views from such Alpine sumits as the Gornergrat or
Aeggischhorn. Immediately at our feet, looking south, lay an immense glacier,
the source of the Dychsu, fed by an accumulation of névé, filling two great
basins, separated by a rocky ridge which projected from a noble ice-crowned
mountain opposite. Far away to the right, above the western bay of the glacier,
rose a tall peak culminating in a slender point of snow, which, though not
corresponding exactly in position with the Koschtantau of the map, we assumed
must be that great mountain, 17,095 feet in height. Looking eastwards, the snout
of a glacier pushed round the corner of a cliff that concealed the whole of its
body, and formed part of a great snowy buttress of the main chain, dividing the
two heads of the Tcherck valley. The ridge over which our pass to the Uruch was
to lead us closed the eastern glen, above which a noble rock-peak shot boldly
into the air, sending down from its flanks a small highlycrevassed glacier.

The extraordinary feature of the view was the steepness of the chain; the peaks
and the gaps between them seemed equally difficult of access, and cut off from
the lower snowfields by long slopes of glistening ice and unscaleable walls of
crag. The only object we had expected to see, and could not discover, was
Dychtau, the companion of Koschtantau in all distant views. After a discussion
whether it would be better to descend on to the glacier, or to elimb higher, it
was determined that I should remain and endeavour to make some outlines of the
surrounding peaks, while Francois and my two companions went off to try and get
a view of Dychtau. They so far succeeded as to catch a glimpse of his peak, the
rest of the mountain being cut off by lower ridges. We loitered away some hours
on the flowery pasturage, supplied with water by the meltings of the beds of
snow which still lay in the hollows. Part of our time was occupied by a grand
council on our future plans, and especially on the expediency of attempting the
ascent of either of the great peaks. Dychtau looked on this side absolutely
inaccessible, and the chances of success in any attack on the still loftier
Koschtantau appeared so slight that we determined to leave him alone also. The
base of the mountain was a day’s march distant over the glacier, and the
difficulties offered by the final peak were such as would require a strong party
of stepcutters to overcome, if they were not altogether insuperable. No help
could be expected from any of our native companions, and we did not wish to mar
the success of our journey by undertaking an expedition leading to almost
certain failure. The second and third summits in the Caucasus and Europe are,
therefore, still not only unscaled but unattempted peaks. We strongly advise any
mountaineer who may think of assaulting them, to go first to the Bezeenghe
valley and inspect their western flanks, which may possibly prove less
formidable than the defences on this side. Having decided that our best plan was
to cross the Stuleveesk Pass while the fine weather lasted, we returned rapidly
to our camp, where we found Paul and the horsemen getting on very well together.
During our absence a hunter had brought a bouquetin, of which Paul had bought a
portion, which he was busily preparing for our dinner. His companions had got a
lamb from the shepherds, and were also making ready a feast after their own
fashion. Paul’s exertions produced a capital meal, and, cheered by the fineness
of the evening, we looked forward with pleasure to the pass to be accomplished
next day.

*August 18th.* — When the time came for arranging the baggage for a start, a
very unexpected difficulty arose with our men, who declared that the horses were
overloaded, and could not possibly carry the baggage over the mountain unless
their masters received higher pay. While declining to accede to their demand, we
pointed out that we should all walk the greater part of the way, and that the
baggage might be subdivided, as our two men would be perfectly content to have
one horse between them. By this means, after a vexatious amount of palaver and
delay, the question was settled, and we set out up the eastern branch of the
Tcherek. After passing over the level meadows, and the stony bed of a stream
flowing from the glacier of an unpronounceable peak which rises grandly on the
left, the path climbs a gentle ascent, whence the tops of both Dychtan and
Koschtantau are for a moment visible together, and then finds itself in another
plain, apparently an old lake-bed. A strong iron-spring bursts out under the
hillside, and colours half the plain with a bright-red deposit.

On the opposite side of the lightly-wooded glen, a large glacier pours over the
cliffs, descending from the same snowfields which feed the infant Rion on the
southern side. The termination of the glacier is most peculiar and picturesque.
The frozen flood descends in one great sheet, until it reaches the edge of the
line of cliffs immediately over the valley, and then separates into two
portions; the larger pours down in an icefall, broken into the usual minarets
and towers; the other keeps a course parallel to the river, along the top of the
cliffs, until it finds a curious cleft, into which it plunges, and shoots forth
a long tongue of ice. Mineral waters, fine air, and mountain excursions are all
ready prepared, and some day perhaps a comfortable bathing establishment may
make this spot a centre for mountain explorers.

The main stream finds its way, both in and out of this basin, through deep
clefts, and the path makes a rough climb along the hillside. Tucker’s horse here
stumbled over some rocks, and, but for the rider’s quickness in getting clear of
the animal, he might have had his leg crushed and been seriously hurt. Happily,
he escaped with a cut knee and a severe shaking. The course of the upper glen
was now nearly due east and west; the birch-wood gradually ceased altogether,
and the ridge of the Stuleveesk Pass closed the view in the distance. On the
hillside numerous flocks and herds were feeding, and we passed the quarters of
the shepherds, who, as usual in this country, content themselves with a
temporary shelter built up of a few branches covered with sheepskins. On our
right a steep broken slope supported the glaciers of the main chain, far less
precipitous in this portion than further west or east; it is here that the known
pass to the Rion valley crosses the mountains. We met two of the guardians of
the district; one, an old gentleman, who looked as if he ought to have retired
from active service, irritated us by descanting to our horsemen on the
difficulties before them, and the impossibility of getting horses over the snow,
except in the early morning while the surface was still frozen.

In the teeth of such remonstrances, we had some difficulty in persuading our
men, always on the look-out for an excuse for halting, to go on, and when we
finally succeeded, the old guardian and his companion came with us, to give
their aid in the perils they declared we must inevitably encounter. The head of
the eastern Tcherek is a wide pasturage, into which pour streams both from the
central chain and from the recesses of the northern range, the summits of which
are exceedingly bold rock-peaks, lofty enough to support a considerable amount
of snow and ice. The highest source issues from a mass of old avalanche débris,
covering the end of a small glacier falling from the upper snowfields. The final
climb to the pass is very steep for horses; it has been rendered easier in
places by the construction of a zigzag path, but near the top the snow entirely
covers the surface. It was satisfactory to find that the old native’s alarm was
unfounded, and that, as we expected, the snow had only melted sufficiently to
give the horses firm foothold.

We had hurried on, to secure a clear view from the pass before midday clouds
blew up and obscured any of the summits. The actual ridge is a thin and steep
comb of rock, probably about 10,000 feet in height. The views from it are
superb, and we were exceptionally fortunate in seeing them almost unclouded.
Looking back from our present position, we commanded the whole eastern face of
the group of the Central Caucasus, as I have before designated the great cluster
of granite peaks, of which Koschtantau appears to be the highest. On the left,
the steep peak we had previously identified as the Nuamquam, which looks down on
Jibiani on the southern side of the chain, was seen above the snowy head of
another eminence, rising out of the snowfields of the great glacier we had
noticed in the morning. Connected with the Nuamquam by a long snowy curtain was
the massive, but yet graceful, pile of crag and ice constituting Koschtantau.
The day before we had only seen one end of the magnificent mass; the fuller view
we now obtained of its rocky buttresses, fretted icefalls, and high-pitched
slopes, fully confirmed us in the wisdom of our decision, to leave this triumph
of mountain architecture alone in its glory.

At the northern foot of the mountain, at the head of the Dychsu glacier, a
comparatively low gap leads somewhere — it would be most interesting to discover
whither. An explorer would probably be able to descend from it into the
Bezeenghe valley. On the right of this break in the chain stand two rocky
giants, the northern unquestionably the Dychtau of the map, a terrifically
steep-sided peak, with a glacier flowing in a deep trench at its foot; the other
a nameless summit, certainly exceeding 16,000 feet in height, and too
precipitous to bear much snow or ice. While admiring, and endeavouring to carry
away a recollection of, the noble outline of the group I have attempted to
describe, we could not help regretting that such grand mountains should have
been deprived of their legitimate honours by a mere volcanic accident like
Elbruz. In Koschtantau and Dychtau the Caucasus would have had a worthy king and
queen. Elbruz is at best a bloated monarch, and has little beyond size to
recommend him.

Immediately to the north was the serrated chain which separates the upper
valleys of the Techerek and Uruch from the minor glens, the streams of which
flow independently to the plain, between the two rivers. Looking east, the
conspicuous feature of the near view was a projecting summit of the main chain,
which reached a greater vertical elevation in less lateral space than most
mountains, It rose immediately out of the valley in a series of precipices,
separated by most disproportionately small ledges, and I believe, if the icy cap
of the mountain had toppled over, there would have been nothing to stop its
fragments until they reached the bed of the Uruch. The greater portion of the
Adai Khokh group was hidden by the nearer ranges; beyond some of its northern
spurs, two or three distant snow-peaks were visible, in one of which we easily
recognised Kazbek.

The train of horses followed us quickly up the pass, and when they rejoined us
on the summit, we found the men in high good-humour at the unexpected easiness
of their day’s work. The first descent on the eastern side was down steep frozen
banks, where the horses, owing to the perfect condition of the snow, and their
own experience in such work, found no difficulty, and the assistance of the
timorous old gentleman was scarcely needed. On reaching the first grass, we
satisfied his claims, and bade him and his companion farewell. There was very
little track to guide us on this side of the mountain, and the horsemen did not
seem well acquainted with the way; so that when, after following a little stream
amongst rich pasturages, we emerged from its glen, on the verge of a steep
descent leading into the trough of the Uruch, we found ourselves too much to the
left, and the horses had to make a slight circuit to reach the valley. The
source of the Uruch is in a moderate-sized glacier, chiefly noteworthy for the
streaks of red snow that lay on its central portion; a pass may probably be
found over it to the Rion valley.

We now ran down a rocky slope, with the precipitous peak we had seen from the
pass immediately opposite. In this case nearer approach did not diminish the
grand effect of its cliffs, and we agreed that it deserved to rank among the
sensational features of the Caucasus. With such an object in view, the scenery
could not be dull, but, putting aside the surrounding mountains, there was
little to attract notice in the long flat glen through which the Uruch runs
quietly for a while before it plunges downward through the ravines we were to
traverse on the morrow. The torrent had made the level ground a museum for
specimens of the rocks of the main chain, brought down by its parent glacier.
Further on we came to a stretch of herbage, where numerous springs burst out of
the ground at every step, frequently converting the path into a watercourse. At
a point marked ❛Kut❜ in the map, a stream from the northern range, the peaks of
which are almost dolomitic in the fantastic boldness of their forms, makes a
graceful leap over a wall of crag before joining the Uruch. Here we saw traces
of human habitations, and a group of peasants, in quaintshaped wideawakes,
employed in haymaking.

Having been on the road for ten hours, we thought it was time to stop, and
instructed Paul to make enquiries of the natives, and find out if they were
disposed to allow us to take up quarters for the night in the half-underground
hut we noticed close by. The chief man among the peasants, who talked a dialect
Paul had the greatest difficulty in comprehending, did not at first sight
impress us favourably. His expression of countenance strongly resembled the
masks worn by country bumpkins in a burlesque, and his comical, not to say
idiotic, appearance was heightened by a quaint bell-shaped wideawake
considerably the worse for wear. At first there seemed some question whether a
welcome would be offered us, but any difficulty was soon removed, and we
proceeded together through the hayfield, by the wall of which the parley had
been held, to the door of the hut. Being built against a steep slope, part of it
was underground, while the front projected from the hillside. The back was
occupied by an extensive but gloomy stable, which was entered through a
perfectly clean chamber, where our men passed the night; as the weather was
fine, we preferred to pitch our tent outside. The pig-faced peasant, against
whom we had at first sight conceived such an unjust prejudice, turned out a
capital fellow. He brought us not only fresh milk, but a peculiar species of
liquor, something between publichouse beer and sour cider, for which we
expressed the greatest admiration, taking care at the same time privately to
empty out the vessel containing it, on the first opportunity.

This was the fifteenth and last occasion that we slept under canvas in the
Caucasus, and as Eastern travellers commonly base their ideas of tents on the
spacious pavilions raised for their accommodation by Syrian dragomen, I may take
this opportunity of describing the little structure for which, owing to the
satisfactory manner in which it had protected us from cold, wind, and rain, we
had by this time acquired quite an affection. The framework consisted of two
pairs of poles, jointed for convenience like a fishingrod, and stoutly shod with
iron spikes. A single rope, forming the ridge of the tent, was passed over the
fork of either pair, and attached at both ends as tightly as possible to the
ground, by pegs or boulders. By this means, and by forcing apart the spikes of
the poles, the canvas which was attached to them was stretched taut in every
direction. I may add that the flap serving as a door could be securely tied
across the entrance, and that the floor formed one piece with the sides, so that
the weight of our bodies served as an additional safeguard against the risk of
being blown over during the night. The internal arrangements were of a simple
character. Having first fastened in a second waterproof floor, we spread out our
light mattrass, bought at Erivan, laying it across the tent. The foundation of
our pillows consisted of our thick boots; upon these we laid our revolvers and
cartridge-pouch, crowning the edifice with a coat or mackintosh. All being then
ready, we took up our respective positions; the dimensions of our snuggery were
six feet square, so that no one could be restless at night without rousing his
neighbours, but we found practically that each had sufficient room to sleep
comfortably.

When the hour of our evening meal arrived, we ate our food seated tailor-fashion
in a row on the mattrass, Paul pushing in to us, from the entrance at the other
end, the various viands, tempting or the reverse, which he had prepared. The
cooking was accomplished by means of a portable apparatus brought from England,
combining, in a comparatively small compass, two saucepans, a fryingpan, a
tripod, a Russian furnace, and a drinking-cup. Our standing dish as far as
Uruspieh, at which point our store became exhausted, was soup made from the
essence of beef-tea procurable in London, and Liebig’s ❛Extractum Carnis,❜
which, combined in nearly equal proportions, and with the addition of a tablet
of Chollet’s ❛Compressed Vegetables,❜ produce a very palatable and supporting
beverage. Dinner finished, we pushed out the plates and cups that had served our
turn, cleared our pockets of heavy articles, such as aneroid barometers,
compasses, and pocket-knives, that might otherwise have disturbed our rest, and,
wrapped in our respective rugs, resigned ourselves to such slumber as the state
of our consciences, or of our digestions, would allow.

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1200]: [See Appendix I. —  ❛The Elbruz Expedition in 1829❜.]{.footnote}

[^1201]: [At Uruspieh I have spoken of Prince — here of Sheikh — maintaining a distinction which, though more nominal than real, was observed by all the people of the country, and even by Russians, with whom we talked on the subject.]{.footnote}
