# CHAPTER XIII.<br /><small> THE URUCH VALLEY AND RETURN TO TIFLIS. </small>{#thirteen .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Wooded Defiles — Styr Digor — A Halt — We Meet a Cossack — A Rainstorm —
Zadelesk — The Gate of the Mountains — Across the Hills and Through the  Forest
— Tuganova — Novo-Christiansky — A Christian Welcome — A Wet Ride — Ardonsk — A
Breakdown on the Steppe — Vladikafkaz — A  Diligence Drive — The Dariel Gorge —
Return to Tiflis — Reflections on the Caucasian Chain — Its Scenery and
Inhabitants — Comparison with the Alps — Hints for Travellers.
<br /><br />
::::

*August 19th.* — The morning was cloudless, and we were fully prepared to enjoy
our day’s journey down the valley of the Uruch, the scenery of which, running
parallel, as it does, to the central chain for many miles, must, we believed,
prove in the highest degree interesting. We had to experience a fresh
illustration of the perversity of the Caucasian nature before starting, and the
result of the trifling concession we had made on the previous day showed the
inexpedience of yielding any point in dispute with these unmanageable
mountaineers. Paul and Francois having walked by turns over the pass, the
horsemen now required that they should be content with one horse between them,
while the men themselves rode. Wishing to push on as far as possible during the
day, and knowing well that the animals were not overladen, we refused to start
until the ridiculous proposal was withdrawn. The promise of our entertainer
that, in case of need, he would find horses, enabled us to take rather a high
line. After a warm debate — in which the feelings of one of our horsemen became
so intense that, unable to express them by words, or even by the remarkable
grunt in the emission of which he was so proficient, he gave point to his
remarks by demonstrations with his dagger — they wisely succumbed, and we became
as good friends as ever.

On parting, the chief of the hay-cutters requested us to take the side of his
village in a disputed claim as to pasturages, which the local chiefs had been
unable to settle, and was likely to come under Russian arbitration. Following
the custom of the country, we promised to do anything in our power, and, after
an affectionate handshaking, set oft for our day’s ride with our no longer
refractory though somewhat sulky attendants. For some distance below the hut,
the Uruch continues to flow through level and marshy meadows. The frequent
waterchannels were serious impediments to our progress, as the mud in them was
often deep, and leaping is not a part of the education of a Caucasian horse. Our
baggage-mule, a plucky little animal, whose performance on the pass had won our
admiration, now stuck hopelessly in the mud, and had to be unloaded, an incident
which recalled, to Tucker and myself, some of our Syrian misadventures. When the
river does begin to descend, it does so with a will, and the path is obliged to
have recourse to very steep zigzags, in order to keep pace with it.

A description in detail of the constantly-shifting features of the landscape for
the next few miles would be wearisome, and give little idea of the beauty of the
scenery. The path, always at a considerable height, on the left side of the
valley, carried us by an alternation of terraces and rapid descents through a
succession of defiles, adorned by fine fir-forests, enlivened by pretty
waterfalls, and overhung on the right by noble snowy ranges. On two grassy
knolls, high on either side of the stream, were groups of the half-underground
huts, that here fill the place of chalets, and numbers of their occupants were
haymaking in the adjoining meadows.

The dwellers on the Upper Uruch, known to the old writers on the country as
❛Digors,❜ are, as far as we saw, the best specimens of Eastern Christianity in
the country. We understood, at the time, that they were a branch of the Ossete
tribe, whose territory they border on the east, but the latest authors seem to
class them, with the people of Balkar and Uruspieh, as a Tartar race. A
conical-shaped wooded eminence closed the view of one of the bends in the
defile, and formed an admirable foreground to the peaks of the main chain. On
reaching its foot, where the path abandoned the hillsides, and returned to the
bank of the torrent, we found ourselves in a region of richer and more varied
foliage, and constantly admired the contrast between the bright green of the
lower slopes and the white shimmer of the peaks that overlooked them.

Leaving behind us the conical hill, we emerged into an open valley, and a basin
surrounded by a semicircular range of precipices opened on the right. Several
glaciers spread their icy skirts to the edge of the cliffs, over which streams
tumbled in picturesque cascades; while, crowning all, snow-peaks, of the
inaccessible order of mountain architecture which might fairly be called
Caucasian, lifted their bold heads against the sky. It was a scene similar to
the cirque of the Diablerets, but on a far grander scale. We rode across the
rich and well-watered meadows on the left bank of the Uruch, until, under the
shade of a picturesque group of chestnut and lime-trees, we halted, to wait for
our horsemen. When they rejoined us, we continued our journey, and, leaving the
first hamlet of the valley on our left, passed through cornfields, almost ripe
for the sickle, either carefully fenced in, or only guarded by a few stakes,
according to the character of the owner.

Styr Digor, where we intended to make our midday halt, is the principal place in
the valley; but our horsemen, for some reason we were unable to comprehend, had
made up their minds to go on to a comparatively small hamlet, an hour’s ride
further down. The backward view of the semicircle of ice-clad peaks and the rich
pastoral foreground was very fine. At the hamlet of Moska, we found only an old
woman, who had nothing to offer us but eggs, and even these she had some
difficulty in collecting, as her hens had apparently mislaid them. After a
shorter halt than usual, and having exchanged salutations with a priest in the
orthodox clerical attire of a long sack-shaped coat and soft felt wideawake, we
rode down the valley, anxious to get as far as possible on the road before
nightfall. During our halt the beauty of the day had departed, and the clouds
had rapidly swept up over the range, threatening rain, which began to fall
slowly later in the afternoon. The path again descended to the banks of the
Uruch, and the glen of its first considerable tributary, the Karagam, opened on
the right. We looked out eagerly towards its head for the great glacier by the
side of which we had bivouacked a month ago, when we had crossed the main chain
from the valley of the Rion. The glen was longer than we anticipated, and
nothing could be seen except the snout of the ice-stream on the upper portion of
which we had spent so many hours.

The valley of the Uruch, having run thus far east and west, or nearly parallel
to the chain, turns sharply to the north, and the scenery becomes less
interesting, though the rich woods and broken crags of the continuous defile
through which the river flows would attract the admiration of travellers in any
region less richly gifted with mountain beauties than that we were now
traversing. The road, still keeping the same course on the left bank, and now
wide enough for the passage of carts, is shaded by dense thickets of hazels.

We were jogging along quietly, when we encountered a man in the ordinary
Caucasian costume, but with a military air, which distinguished him from the
common native. He stopped to speak to us, and, Paul being summoned to our aid,
we learned that he was a Cossack in the Russian service, sent by the Commandant
of Ardonsk, who had received his instructions from General Loris-Melikov to aid
us in our journey. He was now on his second trip to Digor; having been
previously unsuccessful in finding us, he had returned to headquarters only to
be sent back again, with instructions to wait till our arrival — a piece of
unlooked-for attention on the part of the Russian authorities, for which we felt
the more grateful, as our horsemen bad lately shown signs of renewed
insubordination. The readiness to assist us, and appreciation of the real object
of our journey, shown by the officials on the northern side of the Caucasus, was
very gratifying, and our best thanks are due to General Loris-Melikov and his
subordinates for the aid they so kindly gave us.

We soon passed a considerable village, and following for many miles a
terrace-path, along steep hillsides, always green and picturesquely broken,
approached the point where the Uruch turns due north, to fight its way through
the limestone range which flanks the central chain. Having first passed the main
stream by a lofty bridge, we crossed an extremely narrow cleft, from which a
large eastern affluent issues. The heavy clouds and drizzling rain, combined
with the bare character of the scenery, the frequent apparitions of tall
tombstones by the wayside, and the tumbledown, and in many cases ruinous, state
of the towers and groups of farmhouses which dotted the slopes, were in dismal
contrast to the visions of beauty and unclouded sky which had made the earlier
hours of the day so enjoyable. The path first mounted steeply, and then wound at
a level round the ravines and promontories into which the hillside was worn by
the action of time and weather. Occasionally, we passed a patch of cornland, but
the ground was generally stony and uncultivated, and there was no shelter of any
kind from the fury of a tremendous storm of wind and rain which attacked us at
this moment.

For the last hour of our journey we were exposed to a perfect waterspout; the
growing darkness added to the difficulty of guiding our horses against the
storm, and we were glad when the stone-houses of Zadelesk, which the Cossack had
pointed out to us, some time before, as the best halting-place for the night,
were safely reached. The Cossack was now of the greatest use; he took the
arrangement of our sleeping-quarters into his own hands, and we were soon
invited to remove from the comfortless hovel, in which we had taken refuge, to a
snug little room, where mattrasses were found for us, and we passed a very
comfortable night. The day’s ride had been long; with only short halts, we had
been on the road for fully eleven hours.

*August 20th.* — To our surprise, after the storm of the previous night, the
morning was calm and clear. The position of Zadelesk is very curious; perched on
a high brow at least 1,000 feet above the Uruch, it is separated from the
villages on the opposite side, which are comparatively close as the crow flies,
by a tedious climb of several hours. The trough through which the river flows is
too narrow to be inhabited, and the hamlets are perched, like swallows’ nests,
halfway up the steep mountain-walls.

Having paid for our accommodation, we started for the last day’s journey over
the Caucasian by-roads. The whole valley of the Uruch, from Moska downwards, is
so narrow as to merit the title of a gorge; but the principal defile, where the
river and the mountains meet for a final struggle, commences a little more than
a mile below Zadelesk. A meadow shaded by some fine walnut-trees, and enlivened,
when we passed, by a large herd of cattle, affords a pleasant resting-place for
those who have won a way from the plains through the long gorge, and thence a
glimpse may be caught of the shining tablelands and snowy summits at the head of
the Karagam glacier. Immediately behind the meadow towered a splintered comb of
rock, with a deep fissure cut down into it, the subject of a legend, in which
the Devil, as usual, plays the chief part. The path winds round the side of this
spur, and though kept in careful repair, and nowhere difficult for horses, the
precipices below us, on our left, were so startling that we preferred walking,
to running any risk from a chance slip of one of the animals.

Fairly within the jaws of the mountain, we sometimes had to descend into a
lateral cleft, at others to climb over rocky teeth, until we came to a spot
where, the roadmakers having apparently given up as hopeless the task of
penetrating deeper into the gorge, the path began to zigzag steadily upwards.
The Uruch could be seen only from time to time, fretting and foaming between the
narrow walls of its prison. On its opposite side the range rose in stupendous
limestone cliffs fringed with firs, mingled with a variety of deciduous trees.
As we mounted higher, more summits of the snowy chain behind us came into sight,
but the converging cliffs of the defile still cut off all view towards the
north, A long and hot ascent brought us to a brow crowned by one of the usual
tall Mahommedan tombstones, capped by a stone-wrought turban,

Although expecting to see from this point something of our onward course, we
were quite unprepared for the unique beauty of the landscape which was suddenly
spread before our eyes. Standing, as it were, in the gate of the mountains, at a
height of probably not less than 3,000 feet above the level of the Uruch, we
looked out over the low country which lies to the north. A broad hilly district,
clothed in the densest primeval forest, here separates the mountains and the
steppe. In the clearings, few and far between, a thin wreath of smoke revealed
the existence of human dwellings; but the country seemed very little removed
from a state of nature, to the continuation of which the insecurity and
lawlessness, consequent on its position as a border-ground between the Russian
posts on the steppe and the inhabitants of the mountain recesses has chiefly
contributed. The immense extent of undulating woodland stretching to the
horizon, and the rivers — which, unbridged and unconfined, converting their
immediate banks into swampy jungles, wander like bright flashes of light across
the green landscape — convey to the traveller’s mind the impression of a rich
virgin country, such as he would rather expect to meet with in the New World
than in the Caucasus, the supposed cradle of his race. We remained for some
minutes riveted in admiration of the scene, and unable to think of anything
within our experience of more civilised countries with which to compare its rich
yet melancholy effect. In this extraordinary spot we bade farewell to the
mountain fastnesses of the Central Caucasus, and it would have been difficult to
quit that no longer mysterious region by an exit more calculated to leave on our
minds imperishable recollections of its sublimity.

Our Cossack told us that in the old days a native guard was stationed on the
knoll where we were seated, to protect passers-by from the assaults of robbers,
who were wont at times to leap out from behind the rocks on their victims, and
hurl them over the adjoining precipices. The frequent tombstones we had passed
are, in many instances, monuments to these unlucky wayfarers. The path now
turned sharply to the east, and crossed a brow where the limestone rock cropped
out on the surface, and was strangely split into clefts and crannies, which
caused some embarrassment to the horses. Having now fairly emerged from the
gorge, we for a time turned our backs on the Uruch, and rode across a steep
hillside, until we reached the top of the low ridge forming the watershed
between that river and a number of streams which flow down through densely wooded
glens to join the Terek farther east. The track somewhat suddenly entered a
thick forest of entirely subalpine character; the beech was the principal tree,
but there was a great variety of foliage, and the usual dense underwood of
rhododendron and azalea, some of the plants of the latter being on a level with
our heads as we rode between them.

We could not, however, give our undivided attention to the sylvan attractions of
the scenery, as our progress was rendered more or less difficult by the swampy
nature of the ground, aggravated by the late rains, and by the low branches
which, had we not been ruthlessly cropped by a Pätigorsk barber, would have
threatened us with the fate of Absalom. The weather most unluckily again turned
bad; rain threatened, but held off till after luncheon, which we enjoyed on a
freshly-mown meadow. The path continued to follow the watershed, and, after
riding along the bare crest, we turned sharply down a spur separating two deep
but narrow glens, and again entered the forest. At the same time the rain began
to fall in torrents. How we all safely accomplished the next two hours’ ride is
still a mystery tome. The rain was blinding, the track was so deep in mire as to
be in places almost impassable, the trunks and branches put us in constant fear
of concussion of the brain; yet, holding our horses in hand as best we could, we
pushed on at a brisk pace headed by the Cossack, who occasionally looked round
with an air of surprise at seeing his convoy still keeping up. At last we
emerged above the village of Tuganova, built at the foot of the hills on the
left bank of a stream which, issuing from a wooded valley, here finds its way to
the plain.

A well-built whitewashed house, with verandahs, was conspicuous at the entrance
of the village; it is the residence of a native chief, who has been gratified
with a military rank by the Russians, and is now known by the imposing title of
General Tuganova. He is a Mahommedan, and therefore the owner of several wives,
some of whom we admired in passing. It was suggested by the Cossack that we
might claim the General’s hospitality, but as he also warned us that, should the
rain continue, the stream would probably be impassable next morning, we
determined to prolong our day’s journey to Novo-Christiansky, said to be ten
miles distant. The questionable stream, a very rapid one, was barely fordable
now; but we managed to get through it safely, though the Cossack’s horse went
into a hole, and wetted him up to the middle. The wood gradually thinned, until
it ceased altogether, and we found ourselves on a dismal steppe, only relieved
by occasional mounds resembling artificial tumuli. The ride, on a pouring
afternoon, was gloomy enough, and twilight was deepening apace, when we caught
sight of the distant church of Novo-Christiansky, a name derived from the late
simultaneous conversion of the whole village to the Christian creed — a change,
I believe, not unconnected with a remission of taxes. The low houses did not
come in sight for some time, and it was quite dark when we rode in through the
lanes of mud which serve as streets.

Our Cossack was himself a native of this village, and directed us to a detached
building, where we sat in an open verandah, in damp and dismal suspense, while
he searched for the key. When this was found we gained admission to a
village-shop, behind which were two rooms barely, though for the country
pretentiously, furnished. Having been on the road all day, we were now wet,
tired, and hungry, and tried to get a fire, a mattrass of some sort to lie on,
and something to eat. The two first were not forthcoming at all, and the last
did not appear for nearly three hours, so that I had gone fast asleep on the
boards long before food arrived, and did not care to rouse myself to partake of
it. The wetness of the night was some excuse for the delay in supplying our
wants, and the absence of anything to lie on was probably explained by the
change in the faith of the villagers; carpets and cushions being apparently
creature-comforts so associated with Mussulman faith and rule, and opposed to
all Russian ideas, that the first act of a civilised and converted population is
to get rid of all such property, or, at any rate, to abstain from producing it
for the benefit of strangers.

*August 21st.* — In the morning, the rain was still falling as heavily as ever,
and our horsemen showed a strong disinclination to face the weather, and the
perils by water, which they believed must be encountered before reaching
Ardonsk. We, knowing that Vladikafkaz was distant only a short day’s journey,
were anxious to gain it, and felt no inducement to loiter any longer than was
necessary amongst our sluggish entertainers the ❛New Christians.❜ Little can be
written about the miserable fifteen miles’ ride we had now to get over. The rain
fell in torrents the whole time; we had to ford one broad and swollen, but
fortunately shallow, stream, and to wade through the heavy mire of the
everywhere flat and treeless steppe. At last the grove which shades Ardonsk
appeared in the distance, and, crossing a second stream by a bridge, we entered
the place, which consists of a straggling village of farmhouses and cottages,
adjoining a military station laid out by mathematical rules, and still
surrounded by the moat and ditch which were once requisite for its protection.
The impetuous Paul, rashly emulating the feat of Remus, attempted to force his
horse over the ruined rampart; but the animal falling backwards on the slippery
slope, be narrowly escaped an awkward tumble as a punishment for his temerity.

Here we rejoined the highroad once more, and soon discovered a cottage with the
double-headed eagle over the door, pointing it out as the post-station. Being
wet through and plastered with mud, we made our condition an excuse for
remaining at the station, while we despatched the Cossack to report our arrival,
and ask the commandant if any carriage with a hood or spring was to be obtained
m the place. The answer was, that no such luxury was obtainable at any price, so
we reconciled ourselves to the thought of driving the twenty-five miles that
still separated us from Vladikatkaz in the common open carts. We found good food
and wine at the posthouse, the master of which was a civil Russian. The prospect
of a long drive in the rain made us look with envy on the great sheepskin
❛bourcas❜ worn by the people of the country, and we finally concluded a bargain
for two. A second diversion was afforded by the passage of a regiment of
Cossacks, on the way to join those we had seen guarding the Persian frontier on
the Araxes; both the men and their wiry little horses looked admirably adapted
for such duty, but ill-armed, and too little drilled to be able to maintain an
equal contest with European cavalry.

Before starting for our drive, we had to settle matters with our horsemen and
the Cossack; the former were put in high good-humour by the addition of a small
gratuity to the sum they had bargained for, and became enthusiastic in their
gratitude when we granted their request for one of our photographs, which they
had seen at Muchol. Despite the friendliness of our parting, we could not
altogether forget, though we might forgive, their behaviour on the road before
the Cossack joined us, and we were not disposed to underrate his services in
removing difficulties, and aiding us in pushing on, through the weather and mud
of the last two days. He, too, returned to his home well contented.

The chapter of accidents, which awaited us before reaching our destination,
begun with our very start; the plank-bridge, by which the road — the highway of
communication between Russia and Trans-Caucasia — crosses a ditch in the street,
had been allowed to fall to decay, and become impassable for wheeled vehicles.
Driving consequently through the water, our wheels stuck in the mud, our
shaft-horse refused to draw, and, despite the blows and oaths of the driver,
who, up to his waist in water, harangued the refractory animals by turns, we
seemed likely to remain a fixture. By the aid of some bystanders, who vigorously
thrashed the shaft-horse, the principal offender, over the head, we were at last
released, and then, despite the heaviness of the track across the steppe, which
is nowhere metalled, made a good pace to Archonsk, the next station, crossing on
the way several large streams, by means of long wooden bridges. In fine weather
the views of the snowy chain and Kazbek may make this drive interesting, but
when these are hid, nothing can be duller, or more monotonous. Archonsk is a
decayed military post, now inhabited chiefly by a tribe of lean and hungry pigs.

We had travelled nearly five miles beyond it, when the wheel of one of our
❛telegas❜ flew off, and shivered into atoms; the ❛rules of the post❜ prevented
our extricating ourselves from the dilemma, by jumping into a returncart, which
actually passed us, on its way to Vladikafkaz; and we were compelled, after
sending the driver of the broken vehicle back on one of his horses to fetch
another, to take Paul into our cart, and leave Francois in the middle of the
steppe, with a revolver and the luggage, to await the arrival of a fresh
❛telega.❜ The rain had now ceased, and pursuing a gentle but steady ascent, at a
slow pace, we gradually left the verst-posts, and a number of exceedingly tipsy
Russian soldiers, behind, and at nightfall entered Vladikafkaz. Long rows of
whitewashed buildings, used apparently as barracks and government stores, lined
either side of the road. We thought the town would never come to an end, when
suddenly our horses’ hoofs rang on macadam, and in another minute, we were
crossing our old friend, the Terek, by o handsome stone-bridge, built by an
English engineer.

At a distance of a few hundred yards, on the opposite bank of the river, stands
the posthouse, a large and imposing building, which serves both as an hotel, and
as a club for the numerous officers stationed at Vladikafkaz, who, at the moment
of our arrival, were giving a ball to the ladies of the place. Having secured
good rooms, the best dinner they could give us, and o bottle of champagne, to
celebrate the conclusion of our rumbles in the unfrequented byways of the
Caucasus, we waited, with a faith not destined to disappointment, the arrival of
Francois and the luggage.

*August 22nd to 24th.* — Vladikafkaz, which means, in Russian, the Key of the
Caucasus — or Terek Kala, the Castle on the Terek, as the Ossetes prefer to call
it — is the centre of the military position which Russia has occupied, for many
years, at the northern foot of the Caucasian chain, Equidistant between the
Black and Caspian Seas, its fortress served as a check on any junction and
combined action between the tribes of the Kabarda and the still more formidable
mountaineers of Daghestan. When it is remembered that Vladikafkaz is also the
key of the Dariel Pass — the great road across the chain, known from Roman
times, which, rather to the discredit of modern enterprise, still remains the
only one between Anapa and Derbend practicable for wheeled carriages — its
strategic importance is at once explained, and the visitors at no loss to
understand the reason of the great piles of barracks which form the principal
feature of the place.

The town is prettily situated, on level ground, on both banks of the Terek —
open on the north, but sheltered on the south by wooded hills, behind which rise
the steeper slopes and higher summits of the Caucasian chain. The place has a
thoroughly Russian air. Our hotel stood in an open square: on one side was the
bazaar, a row of covered arcades filled with stores, in which Ossete fur-caps
were the most tempting wares; on the other stretched a long boulevard, with a
shady and graveled walk down the middle. The houses along this are neat
buildings; the rest of the town consists of large government stoves, offices,
and barracks, dropped here and there in the mud, amongst whitewashed cottages,
which stand back modestly from the toad, as if they felt out of place in such
company. There is, as usual in Russian towns, a shady but untidily-kept public
garden on the bank of the Terek, the waters of which only cover a small portion
of its wide stony channel. On the slopes of the nearer hills are some villas, in
the semi-English style much affected in Russia, and a fortress, important until
the last few years as a defence to the town against any sudden inroad of the
mountaineers, terror of whom kept the place in an almost perpetual state of
siege.

The crowd collected by the performance of a rope-dancer at one end of the
boulevard gave us a good opportunity of observing the characteristic costumes of
the country. Russian ladies in Parisian toilettes, smoking cigarettes, were
mingled with tall regular-featured Ossetes, and comparatively puny and
sallow-faced officers, wearing the unbecoming baker’s cap so common in Russia.
On the outskirts of the crowd hung Persian labourers, in closefitting skullcaps
and ragged dress, come thus far north in search of a livelihood by working on
the roads. Sentinels, standing at odd corners, guarded nothing with a careless
air, and a military band, lent life to the performance, which was not in itself
of a very exciting character.

Our first visit was to the post-office, to obtain our letters. The pleasure of
being informed, by the head official, that three letters for me had been
received, was soon damped by the discovery that an over-zealous clerk, having
seen our names in the Pätigorsk Visitors’ List, had sent them on there. Of
course we telegraphed to Pätigorsk, but nothing more was ever heard or seen of
the mis-sent letters. To our dismay, the first news that met us, when we
enquired about a carriage for Tiflis, was that the Dariel road was broken, and
that all communication had been interrupted for several days. We began to think
we should never escape from floods. The damage had been done in the second stage
out of Vladikafkaz, and as a company of soldiers were said to be at work in
making the road passable for carriages, we had nothing to do but wait till news
came of the completion of their task, before which time the postmaster refused
to send out any vehicle.

At first it seemed us if we should be obliged to renew our acquaintance with
❛telegas,❜ but our perseverance was rewarded by the completion of an arrangement
for the hire of one of the small ❛diligences,❜ which are a peculiarity of the
Russian postal system. These solidly-built and heavy conveyances, which require
four or six horses to draw them, according to the nature of the road, contain,
notwithstanding their size, only five passengers, besides the driver and the
conductor who are attached to each. The inside holds two, or three on a pinch,
and there are seats for three more, on what, though slightly different, may be
called the banquette. They ave fitted up for long journeys, and it is possible
to sleep very comfortably inside, as a board lets down from the front, and
enables the traveller to lie at length during the night. The presence of the
conductor — who, armed with a horn, blows warnings to all lesser traps to get
out of the way, wakes up sleepy postmasters, and takes on himself all
responsibility in procuring horses — is also a great convenience, especially to
the foreigner not speaking Russian. On Sunday evening we saw, to our delight, a
carriage drive in from Tiflis, and the road being thus conclusively proved to be
open, the postmaster promised us horses at an early hour on the following
morning.

*August 24th.* — The weather, which had been cloudy during the two days of our
stay at Vladikafkaz, cleared during the night, and on looking out of window, at
sun rise, we were greeted by the double peak of Kazbek, rising high above the
ridges on the right of the gap of the Dariel Pass. The view of the snowy chain
was far finer than we were prepared for. The mountains west of Kazbek, and the
offshoots of the Adai-Khokh group, were well seen, and far away on the horizon,
Dychtau once more showed his snowy head. The precipices on the eastern face of
this tremendous peak, even from this distance, excited mingled feelings of
admiration and respect. Our conductor amused us by piling the roof of the
❛diligence❜ with water-melons, a common article of food in Cis-Caucasia, which
he meant to dispose of at a profit to the masters of the stations high in the
mountains, where the fruit was not so easily obtainable.

There are three stages between Vladikafkaz and Kazbek, and the distance is about
twenty-eight miles. During the first stage the road was well-made, and almost
level; after crossing a flat meadow, where we passed a portion of the garrison
engaged in drill and rifle-practice, it runs between low hills along the banks
of the Terek. The vapours, which almost daily cover the northern plains, had
already risen, and it was curious to see them breaking like waves against the
steeper slopes before us, while a glimpse up the gap of the Dariel showed that
further in the mountains the sky was of an unclouded blue. Shortly before
reaching Balta, we passed two carriages, filled by the family of a Russian
gentleman, travelling with so numerous a party that they required twelve horses
to draw them. The spot where the Terek had swept away the road was a mile or two
beyond the station. The accident had arisen from the half-hearted and timid way
in which the work had been originally carried out. On the flat, or where the
soil is friable, no finer highway could be desired; but divergently a hard mass
of rock which requires blasting is encountered, the engineers shrink from the
bold course that would be taken by the peasants of any Swiss commune, and either
climb over the top, or creep round the foot of the obstacle. The latter course
had in the present instance been adopted, and it was but the natural result that
the Terek, swollen by heavy rains, undermined and swept away the ill-constructed
embankment on which the road was carried. The soldiers had done their best,
under the circumstances, by throwing down stones and piles of fagots; but the
place was only just passable, and our horses had to be taken out, and the heavy
carriage dragged across by the men, who left their work for the moment to aid
us.

At Lars — the second station — the scenery, hitherto rather tame, suddenly
assumes a sterner aspect, and the neat whitewashed buildings of the posthouse
look out of keeping with the grim crags that tower above them. There is an
ascent of nearly 3,000 feet from this place to Kazbek, We required six horses,
the Russian family twelve; but as we had arrived a few minutes first, and the
stables did not contain the number of animals required for both parties, our
fellow-travellers were compelled to wait. The old gentleman was naturally angry,
and produced a ❛crown-podorojno❜; but, finding that our conductor — by whose
readiness we had got the start of him — was possessed of a similar document, he
submitted, with much gainsaying, to fate and the law of the post, that when the
❛podorojnos❜ are of a similar class, first come shall be first served. His
family, more philosophically disposed, seemed to care little for the delay, the
governess and her charges setting out on an expedition up the nearest hillside,
with a spirit which excited our hearty admiration.

The famous Dariel gorge differs from most of those traversed by Alpine
carriage-roads in one essential feature. It is not so narrow but that the road
finds place alongside the river, without making any considerable ascent above
it. The traveller is, therefore, exempt from the terrors of profound abysses and
yawning depths, which suggest themselves so often to the French tourist in the
Alps. That curiously-constituted individual will, however, when he comes. to
describe this defile, probably apply to it his favourite epithet of ❛horribly
beautiful❜ and, it a classical scholar, will proceed to quote Virgil's ❛Savis
cautibus horrens Caucasus,❜ a passage the Roman poet may well have founded on
the report of some friend who had wandered as far as the even then famous ❛Porte
Caucasie.❜

The unimpressionable Anglo-Saxon, now that the once real danger of being picked
off by a mountaineer in ambush behind some neighbouring crag no longer exists,
will feel no other emotion than one of vague delight in gazing up to the
gigantic cliffs amongst which he finds himself. Their bold and broken forms must
arrest the attention of even the most indifferent observer of nature. The mere
fact of the existence of a carriage-road is some detraction from the
impressiveness of a mountain-gorge, and, partly perhaps for this reason, we felt
indisposed to rank the Dariel beside the ravines of the Tcherek and the Uruch we
had lately traversed, yet we agreed unanimously that it had nothing to fear from
a comparison with the finest defiles of the Alps. The road deserts the line of
the old horse-track — a mere shelf cut in the rock on the left bank of the river
— and, crossing to the opposite side, winds round the huge bastions of
basalt-crag, which rise tier upon tier to a height of at least 5,000 feet above
the level of the Terek.

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption .break-before}
![Fort of Dariel.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0442.jpg "Fort of Dariel."){#b442}
::::

After passing the narrowest part of the ravine, the fortress of Dariel comes
into view — a low brick building loopholed for musketry, and commanding, by
means of two projecting towers, the narrow pass. A flat-topped table-shaped
mass of rock on the opposite side of the valley was, we were told, formerly
occupied by a more ancient fortification, now entirely destroyed. The ascent
here becomes very rapid, and the Terek falls in a succession of cascades. Beyond
Lars, the mountain-walls on either hand are unbroken by any deep cleft, until,
through a sudden opening on the right, the upper portion of the glacier of
Devdorak and the summit of Kazbek come into view, and, to an eye unaccustomed to
scenery on such a scale, seem close at hand. The tower of rock on the ridge
between the two glaciers is easily recognisable. Close to the spot at which, two
months before, we had crossed the Terek on to the highroad, we met one of our
old porters, who hailed us with enthusiasm. At Kazbek posthouse the German
speaking woman who attends to the wants of passers-by, entertained us with an
account of some people who, since our previous visit, had come from Tiflis to
ascend the mountain, but had been content with looking at it, and passing on. At
Kobi the postmaster was, as usual, tipsy. Night drew on, and rain began to full
as we drove up the pass, and, owing to the absence of moon, we were obliged to
sleep at the station near the summit, which is not so well-fitted-up as most of
those on this road.

*August 25th.* — We started at 5 A.M., and after twelve hours' rapid progress,
without any delays from want of horses, reached Mscheti, the station nearest
Tiflis, where, as my readers may recollect, the Dariel and Kutais roads unite.
Despite the double drain inevitably thrown on the resources of the
establishment, the supply of horses is only the same as at other stations on the
road, and travellers are constantly obliged to submit to the inconvenience and
annoyance of stopping at an early hour, when only twelve miles distant from
their destination. On the present occasion, after failing in an endeavour to
hire peasants’ horses, we were forced to make up our minds to the impossibility
of reaching Tiflis that evening, and to take up our quarters on the floor of a
prettily-decorated room intended for the use of the Grand Duke, but in which
travellers willing to pay tor the accommodation are allowed to spend the night.

*August 26th.* — At an early hour in the morning we drove into Tiflis, and
avoused the people of the ❛Hotel d’Europe,❜ who had almost given up expecting
our return. During the three following days we were fully occupied, first in
settling our plans, and afterwards in making the arrangements necessary to their
execution. Our original scheme had included a visit to Daghestan and the
Caspian, but the time taken by our explorations in the central chain prevented
us from fully carrying it out. We can therefore say nothing of Kakhetia, a broad
valley teeming with corn and wine, and overlooked by the snowy mountain-wall of
the Eastern Caucasus, which was described to us by some of the residents at
Tiflis, in the most glowing terms, as little short of an earthly paradise. We
had also to give up all thoughts of attacking Basardjusi (a peak of 14,700 feet,
surrounded by others exceeding 13,000 feet, all of which are still unclimbed),
and of exploring the district of which it is the centre, which we had been
assured by Herr Abich we should find well worthy of o visit.

The question now before us was by what route we should return to the coast of
the Black Sea, and our enquiries resulted in the determination to send some of
our luggage with Francois direct to Kutais, while we, leaving the highroad at
Suram, followed the valley of the Kur to Borjom and Achaltzich, and thence rode
across the hills to Kutais. To effect the arrangements necessary for the
execution of this plan we had to pay many visits to the various official
bureaux, where the employés seemed to have acquired a skill in the art of ❛how
not to doit,❜ which could scarcely be surpassed even at home. At last the
various ❛podorojnos,❜ police orders, and passports were all procured, and we had
only to consign our heavy portmanteaux, and a box of purchases, to the care of
the agent of the Black Sea Steam Navigation Company, through whom we
subsequently received them in England.

In the intervals when we were not engaged in the preparations for our homeward
journey, we found time to call on Herr Radde, one of the few residents who
happened to be in Tiflis at this time of year. We also visited the studio of a
Russian painter, who has boldly taken for his subjects the scenery of the Dariel
and the highest mountains of the Caucasus, and were glad to carry away with us
some of his pictures, as reminiscences of a country with which European artists
arc as yet unacquainted. In the evenings we went to the gardens in the German
quarter, known respectively as ❛Mon Plaisir❜ and ❛Sans Souci,❜ where a crowd of
townsfolk, sitting under cover, sip their tea, and listen to the strains of a
good band; or, if so disposed, wander in couples down long alleys arched over
with trellised vines, from which the grapes hanging in ripe clusters seemed, at
the present season, almost ready to drop into one’s mouth. Some of the accounts
we heard of the effect produced by the news of our ascent of Kazbek were rather
amusing. It had apparently caused much discussion at Tiflis among the citizens,
who had all their lives asserted the impossibility of reaching the summit. We
were told that, on the first intelligence being received, a person high in
authority had remarked, that it was strange that a mountain which had been
declared for sixty years inaccessible by Russian officers, should be ascended by
Englishmen in a few days. The answer of the insulted officers was prompt and
ingenious: ❛We could have said we had been to the top as easily as the
Englishmen!❜ I do not think there was a single Russian in Tiflis, unconnected
with the Government, who believed in the truth of our story.

We amused ourselves, during our stay at Tiflis, by contrasting our present ideas
of the Central Caucasus with those with which we had left the same place two
months previously, and in endeavouring to ascertain in what particulars the
impressions acquired by reading or hearsay had been reversed or modified by
actual experience, We found the process a profitable one, and I think a summary
of the results obtained will not be without interest to the general reader.

The published accounts of the Caucasus, that we had met with before leaving
England, had been more or less vague and unsatisfactory. Their authors had, as a
rule, kept at a respectful distance from the giants of the chain, and, indulging
chiefly in ethnological researches, confined themselves, when they approached
mountain scenery, to generalities, useless to the mountaineer, anxious to form
some idea of the character of the range, the height of its peaks, and the
relations of its groups. Those who did give information on the subject
contradicted one another in the most emphatic manner, and only increased the
perplexity of the reader. We learnt from one writer: ❛The mountains of the
Caucasus are not peaked, as in the Alps, but are either flat or cup-shaped; the
existence of glaciers is uncertain.❜^[^1300]^ We read in another: ❛Neither the Swiss
Alps, the Taurus, Atlas, Balkan, Apennine, or any of the well-known mountains of
Europe, have such furrowed and broken, rocky and snowy precipices, or such bold
peaks, as the giants of the main chain of the Caucasus. The Orientals have
rightly named these mountains the “thousand-pointed.”❜^[^1301]^

The first-quoted opinion seemed the most popular, and many of our friends in
England smiled at our idea of setting out to climb in a region where, as they
believed, there were no valleys or steep-sided summits, and where nothing was to
be seen except two large volcanoes, rising from a lofty plateau, and culminating
in snowslopes, the ascent of which would be equally laborious and uninteresting.

These accounts so far imposed upon us that, when we reached Constantinople, the
chief impression in our minds was, that the Central Caucasus consisted of a long
watershed, devoid of prominent peaks, and dominated at either end by a huge dome
— the eastern known as Kazbek, the western as Elbruz. In fact, we were led to
believe that the architecture of the mountain region bore some resemblance to
that of the Exhibition Building of 1862, and that for beauty of outline it could
no more be compared to the Alps than could the Brompton shed to a Gothic
cathedral.

The first ray of light that dawned upon our minds was the information we gained
from Mr. Gitford Palgrave, who had been twice to the base of Elbruz, and
discoursed with enthusiasm of the granite peaks and foaming torrents he had seen
on the way. When we reached Batoum, and for the first time saw the mountains
with our own eyes, our rising hopes were converted into certainty. The serrated
array of rocky teeth and icy cones which stretched along the northern horizon,
convinced us, at once, that climbing sufficient to satisfy the greediest
mountaineering appetite would be found there, and the way in which ridge behind
ridge rose up to the snowy chain disposed for ever of the plateau theory, and
satisfied us that many landscapes of exquisite beauty must be hid within the
folds of the mountains.

Our journey from Kutais to Tiflis did not add much to this knowledge, nor did we
gain any practical information from our intercourse with Russian officials, whom
we found, with the exception of General Chodzko and a few others, entirely
unacquainted with the nature of the mountain districts west of Kazbek, The
German savants resident at Tiflis, and in the employ of the Government, were far
better informed. Herr Radde had visited the upper valleys of Mingrelia, and had
himself attempted to ascend Elbruz. Herr Abich had examined both summits with
the accurate eye of a man of science, and gave us hints which we afterwards
turned to good account. The purchase of the Five Verst Map enlightened us on
some matters of detail, indicating the. existence of large icefields, and
confirming our belief in the practicability of our proposed route, by marking
numerous passes across the chain, and showing groups of villages near the heads
of most of the valleys. The map also first revealed to us two mountains,
Koschtantau and Dychtau, respectively 17,000 and 16,900 feet in height, yet
hitherto unknown to English geographers.

The real character of the tribes, and the extent to which Russian rule was a
reality in the more remote districts, was another topic which interested us
nearly as much as the nature of the country. On this subject we had read
contradictory reports. The majority of travellers described the natives of the
mountains as robbers, in whose word no trust could be placed — barbarians by
nature, and incapable of civilisation. On the other hand, they were painted, by
a few enthusiasts, as noble patriots, whose only crime was to have been defeated
in an unequal struggle against an invading despotism. We were unanimously
assured at Kutais and Tiflis that the subjugation of the inhabitants was
complete, and that there was no longer any risk to life or property in
travelling amongst them. Each informant had his own view as to their character,
but, satisfied with the fact that our journey would not be rendered
impracticable, we were content to wait and judge for ourselves.

Such was our knowledge of the Caucasus and its inhabitants on leaving Tiflis for
Kazbek posthouse. I shall now proceed to the results of our day-by-day
experiences during the two months we spent in the mountains. A definite idea of
the scenery of the Caucasian chain will best be formed by comparing and
contrasting it to that of the Alps.

The first feature that strikes the traveller is the singleness of the Caucasian
compared to the Alpine chain. I do not mean that it is one long snowy wall, and
nothing more. It is single contrasted with the Alps, in the same way that the
Pennines are a single chain, although they possess spurs like the Weisshorn, and
minor ranges like those that form the southern boundary of the Val Pelline. This
characteristic is proved from the fact that, from elevated points north or south
of it, the same summits are generally visible, whereas, as is well known, the
observer at Milan or Lucerne, Salzburg or Venice, sees from each an entirely
different range of snowy summits. From this cause the panoramas seen on the
highest peaks of the Caucasus differ from those of the Alps, in the fact that
the portion of the horizon occupied by mountains is far less in the former than
in the latter. Whether this is to be considered a recommendation, or a fault,
must depend on individual taste; but no one can deny that if it had been desired
to enhance by contrast the stern beauty and bold outlines of the central chain
of the Caucasus, no better means of doing so could have been found than by
putting beside them the boundless plains of the steppe, or the wavelike ridges
of the Mingrelian hills.

Let us now descend from the mountain-tops, whence we have naturally begun our
survey, and take a closer view of the individual features of the country. As a
whole, Caucasian must, I think, rank above Alpine scenery. There is nothing in
Switzerland or Tyrol that can compare with the magnificent grouping of the
Suanetian ranges, or with the gorges cut by the northern rivers through the
limestone ridge which bars their way down to the steppe. In the Caucasus the
slopes are steeper, and the usual character of the peaks is that they shoot up
from the valleys at their base, in unbroken walls of rock and ice, to which the
cliffs of the Wetterhorn afford the nearest parallel. Enormous cornices of ice
are frequent, and sometimes crown the highest peaks, presenting an insuperable
obstacle to the climber. The mountain-sides, owing to their precipitous
character, afford precarious resting-places to the winter-snow, and avalanches,
which choke the upper glens to an extent rarely seen in Switzerland, are
consequently of frequent occurrence.

Another peculiarity of the Caucasus is the constant appearance of red snow,
which in the Alps is often heard of, but seldom seen. Here it is met with every
day, and the effect produced is as if the whole surface of the slope had been
sprinkled with brickdust. We did not sufficiently explore the glaciers to be
able to form a conclusive judgment as to their extent; but there can be little
or no doubt that the number of square miles covered by snow and ice is less than
in the Alps, though there are many glaciers worthy of comparison with any Swiss
rivals. Owing to the steepness of the chain, the icefalls ave loftier, and in
every respect finer, than those of the Alps, and they are rendered more
attractive to the eye by the general purity of their surface.

So little having been known up to the last few years of the existing glaciers of
the Caucasus, it is not surprising that we have as yet scanty information as to
the traces of the glacial epoch in this region. So recently as 1858, Herr Abich
declared that the Caucasian chain showed no marks of its influence; since that
date, however, the learned traveller has seen reason to change his opinion, and
has himself borne witness to the existence of traces of vast glaciers in the
upper valleys of the Ardon and the Ingur. Mons. E. Favre of Geneva, who was in
the country at the same time as ourselves, and to whose kindness I am indebted
for the following details, recognised marks of glacial action on an extended
scale on the Krestowaja Gora and in the Dariel gorge. In the neighbourhood of
Vladikafkaz, and on the steppe to the north of it, he found numerous erratic
blocks, generally of granite, and from fourteen to sixteen feet in thickness:
and in the valley of the Baksan, fifteen miles from the present glacier, and two
miles above the village of Uruspieh, there is a moraine, 200 feet in height,
principally composed of granite blocks. Sufficient data have already been
collected to justify the assertion that the present glaciers of the Caucasus,
like those of the Alps, are only the shadows of their former selves.

Fine as Alpine forests often are, they can bear no comparison with those of the
Caucasus. Lest it should be thought I have overstated the effect likely to be
produced by the woodland scenery of Mingrelia on an European mini, I shall take
the liberty of quoting the words in which Herr Wagner sums up his eloquent
description of a ride near Kutais: ❛Every spot that is not occupied by perennial
plants presents one tangled growth of grasses, flowers, annuals, and every
variety of creeper. Higher up, among the trees, the eye is soothed by the
numerous shades of green, from the sombre verdure of the fir, tamarisk, and
cypress, to the lustrous foliage of the laurel, and to the silver-green of the
Colchian poplar, whilst the purple clusters of the grapes peep out beneath every
branch. "Why, this is like Paradise,” exclaimed my companions, in one breath, at
the sight of such glorious profusion.❜ In richness of flora the Alps must also
yield to their rivals: the azalea and rhododendron make the ❛alpenrosen❜ seem
humble, and even the gentian looks bluer when brought into immediate contrast
with beds of snowdrops, while there is nothing nearer home to compare with the
gorgeous magnificence of the Caucasian tiger-lilies and hollyhocks.

Hitherto the comparison has been in favour of the ❛new love,❜ which, without
wishing to persuade them to be ❛off with the old,❜ we desire to introduce to the
notice of lovers of Alpine nature. I must now call attention to the deficiencies
of the Caucasus, and the points in which it is manifestly inferior to its
better-known rival. A total absence of lakes, on both sides of the chain, is the
most marked failing. Not only are there no great subalpine sheets of water, like
Como or Geneva, but mountain-tarns — such as the Dauben See on the Gemmi, or the
Klonthal See near Glarus — are equally wanting. There is no firstclass waterfall
in any of the valleys we visited, nor did we hear of any elsewhere. Certain
districts, notably the headwaters of the Terek, are duller than anything in
Switzerland, and their treeless monotonous glens are defaced, rather than
enlivened, by the dingy and ruinous character of the native dwellings. Add to
this list of defects that, on the north side, the mountains sink abruptly into a
bare and featureless steppe, and that the only halting-places within reach —
Pätigorsk and Kislovodsk — cannot vie in attractions with the numerous
tourist-haunts on the north side of the Alps, and we shall, I think, have fairly
gone through the principal charges to which Caucasian scenery is liable.

Readers seeking geological information in old scientific works on the Caucasus
must beware of the hasty generalisations in which they indulge, on the strength
of an acquaintance with perhaps only one valley of the chain. It is unfortunate
that no member of our party was skilled enough to make his observations of
value; but we have the authority of Herr Radde, as well as the evidence of our
own eyes, for stating that the central chain is chiefly composed of granite, and
that the rocks of both Kazbek and Elbruz are igneous. I do not think that anyone
who having once been an active volcano. The limestone ridge on the north of the
watershed is more abrupt, and the gorges cut through it have bolder features
than those of the secondary ridges of Mingrelia, where the rock is more friable,
and steep slopes take the place of cliffs.^[^1302]^

I have hitherto spoken only of that portion of the country with which we became
personally familiar, the 120 miles between Kazbek and Elbruz, and it must
therefore be borne in mind that scant justice has been done to a chain the
entire length of which, from Anapa to Baku, is 700 miles. Those who may be
disposed to carry on the work of exploration have, consequently, a large field
open to them. West of Elbruz there is said to be much noble scenery; the
glaciers are few and small, but the chain bristles with sharp peaks, between
10,000 and 12,000 feet in height. The depopulation of this district after the
late Abkhasian revolt will prove a serious difficulty, to be taken into account
by future travellers. Eastwards, between the Dariel Pass and the Caspian,
stretch the highlands of Daghestan, a region of flat pasturages, cut off from
one another by profound gorges, and dominated by at least three snowy groups,
rising to a height of over 13,000 feet.

Having said thus much of the natural features of the Caucasus, we may now review
its inhabitants. The diverse character of the mountain-tribes renders any
general description of them a work of extreme difficulty.^[^1303]^ Even in the
small portion of the chain we visited, leaving out, Abkhasia, all but a corner
of the Tcherkess country (the true Circassia), and Daghestan, the scene of
Schamyl’s final resistance and capture, we encountered three entirely distinct
races, speaking widely different languages. These were the Georgian tribes of
the southern valleys, the Tartars of the north, and the mysterious Ossetes, who
have long been a puzzle to ethnologists. The language of the latter, according
to Sir Henry Rawlinson, is the most nearly allied to Sanscrit spoken west of the
Indus. The other mountaineers use dialects of Tartar and Georgian so diverse
that the people of one valley often have difficulty in understanding those of
the next, although nominally speaking the same language.^[^1304]^

The religions of the Caucasus are as various as its languages. As a rule,
whatever religion exists on the south side of the chain is called Christian, and
on the north Mahommedan, The Ossetes, as usual, must be excepted; they were
converted to Christianity in the days of Queen Thamara, but afterwards relapsed
into their former paganism, which is at the present day again overlaid by a
slight varnish of nominal Christianity. This re-conversion, if it deserves the
name, took place about the time of Herr Wagner’s visit to the country (1843-4),
and he gives an amusing account of the means employed by the Russian
missionaries to effect their end. ❛The Russians❜ (says this writer) ❛have made
many efforts to win back the Ossetes to Christianity. This was easily
accomplished with a people indifferent about religious matters, especially as a
linen shirt and a silver cross were given to every Ossete who underwent baptism.
The pious zeal of the new converts was greatly excited by these means, and there
was no end to the number of neophytes who aspired to the rite of baptism, till
at length it came to pass that one immersion was not reckoned sufficient, and
that many Ossetes, in order to become genuine Christians, and at the same time
the owners of a respectable amount of linen, received the sacrament five or six
times following.❜ He adds: ❛If the Russian Government had permitted other
Christian confessions to hold intercourse with the mountaineers of the Caucasus,
their Christianity might possibly have been something better than “sounding
brass and a tinkling cymbal.”❜ 

One of the peculiarities of the country is that the superiority of the Christian
over the Mahommedan population, commonly seen in Syria, is entirely reversed. In
the Caucasus the traveller will be compelled to contrast the truthfulness,
industry, and courteous hospitality of the Mahommedans north of the chain with
the lying, indolence, and churlishness of the Christians on the south. The
Georgian races who inhabit the upper valleys of Mingrelia are, as a rule, too
lazy to take advantage of the rich natural gifts of the country they inhabit;
they are greedy of illgotten gain, and careless of life in its pursuit. This
conclusion as to their character is the result of our own experience, but it is
confirmed by that of other travellers, even from remote times. Thus Chardin,
writing nearly 200 years ago, says: ❛The women of Mingrelia are extremely civil,
but otherwise the wickedest in the world,— haughty, furious, perfidious,
deceitful, cruel, and impudent — so that there is no sort of wickedness they
will not put in execution. The men are endowed with all these mischievous
qualities, with some addition. There is no wickedness to which their
inclinations will not naturally carry them, — but all are addicted to thieving.
That they make their study — that they make their whole employment, their
pastime, and their glory. Assassination, murder, and lying are among them
esteemed to be noble and brave actions, and for all other vices, they are
virtues in Mingrelia.❜^[^1305]^

Haxthausen, whose work was published in 1854, writes: ❛The Russian officers,
civil and military, all agreed in describing live people of this country,
especially the Imeritians, as thoroughly depraved, immoral, thievish,
mendacious, and quarrelsome.❜ 

Malte-Brun, in his ❛Geographical Encyclopedia,❜ which contains much correct
information on the Caucasus, thus describes the Imeritians: ❛The indolence of
the inhabitants allows the rich gifts of nature and the climate to perish in a
most useless manner.❜ He says of the Mingrelians: ❛They live surrounded by
women, who lead a life of debauchery, often eat with their fingers, and bring up
their children to lying, pillage, and marauding.❜ 

The Tartars of the Kabarda are in most qualities the reverse of their southern
neighbours. Rich in flocks and herds, and cultivating cornland sufficient to
supply them with daily bread, they pass a peaceable and patriarchal existence,
and are ever ready to extend towards travellers that hospitality which they
regard in the light of a religious duty. One unamiable trait they share with all
the Caucasian races we came in contact with — a desire to drive a hard bargain
in matters of business.

The distinction here drawn between the character of the so-called Christian and
the Mahommedan tribes is so marked, that no honest traveller can pass it over in
silence. The explanation of the fact must be sought in the degraded character of
the native Georgian and Armenian Churches, and in the evil wrought by Russian
proselytism, which endeavours to effect wholesale conversions by holding out
baits of worldly advantage. Converts thus made abandon their old religion
without gaining anything in its place. For the present, the heads of the Greek
Church may more profitably employ its energies in sending missionaries to lead
their ruffianly co-religionists in the southern valleys to a better mode of
life. When Mahommedans have no longer to maintain a guard, to protect their
flocks from Christian thieves, there will be more hope of their adopting the
religion recommended to their notice.

I now turn to the relations existing between the Russian Government and the
mountain-tribes. Our observations fully confirmed all we had been previously
told respecting them. Since the conclusion of the Crimean War, the whole country
has been fairly conquered, and the inhabitants have learnt from experience that
any rising will be promptly put down and summarily revenged. The European
traveller need no longer fear open robbery, except in Suanetia, and in this
district it is owing rather to want of will than of power that the Russians
leave the village communities to their native misrule. Selfishly speaking, the
policy of the Government in abstaining from garrisoning the upper valleys is
prudent; it would gain nothing, and spend much, by acting otherwise. It matters
little to Kautais if the inhabitants of two Suanetian villages like to cut one
another’s throats, and the maintenance of an armed force in the district would,
except from a philanthropic point of view, be unprofitable. That such conduct,
however, shows a neglect of the first duty of a Govermment, even Russians must
admit, if they believe, with us, that the extension of any organised system of
justice, however imperfect, is a blessing to regions formerly a prey to the
misrule and exactions of petty princes, and still the scene of
constantly-recurring robberies and murders. The evidence of our Mingrelian
servant, whose prejudices were certainly not Russian, was conclusive on this
point. The picture he drew of his native district, Sugdidi, on the Lower Ingur,
during the Crimean War, when Russian rule was relaxed, was indeed deplorable.
Robberies, as often as not accompanied by murder, were of daily occurrence; the
culprit in most cases escaped, shielded by the influence of the petty chieftain
whose vassal or serf he was. A man with a reputation as a successful murderer
was too useful ever to feel the lack of princely favour. The peasant-farmer,
with the knowledge that another would reap the fruits of his toil, and that a
large portion of his crops would go to swell the contents of the nearest
chieftain’s barn, had no inducement to agricultural improvement.

This state of things is now at an end. Offences against life and property are
promptly punished, and though small disputes still come before the native
princes, an appeal is possible to Russian officials. The ukase for the
emancipation of the serfs, the operation of which was specially delayed in
Mingrelia, is just taking effect. In return for these advantages, the
inhabitants pay a housetax varying, in the mountain districts, from five to ten
roubles (fifteen to thirty shillings) per annum. This does not seem regarded as
a grievance, but we heard complaints of the increased price of imported goods,
owing to the high tariff maintained by the protective policy of the Moscow
merchants, Georgia enjoys a special immunity from the conscription, founded on
the terms on which it was handed over to the Czar by the last of its native
princes, and the Caucasians are, as a rule, exempted from compulsory service.
The dark picture given above of the past condition of the country is, of course,
far from being universally applicable. It is drawn from one district, towards
the Black Sea coast; but the whole mountain region has always been more or less
given over to lawlessness,and the dwellers inthe plain Lad probably good ground
for attributing to their neighbours of the mountains a belief in the following
legend: ❛This wild race pretend, that after God created the world, an edict was
published, by which all people were summoned to take possession of their several
portions. All mankind had an appointed share, except the inhabitants of the
Caucasus, who had been forgotten. Upon putting in their claim, which the Deity
acknowledged to be just, they received permission to live at the expense of
their neighbours, and assuredly they reap ample profits from the presumption of
such license.❜ Like our own Highlanders of former days, the mountaineers of the
Caucasus look on the wealth of the lowland population as their lawful
perquisite, and their final subjugation will be a necessary consequence of the
progress of civilisation.

Though the politician may, with reason, regret that the Russian armies, no
longer conscious of formidable foes in their rear, can now, from the highlands
of Armenia, look down over the Valley of the Buphrates, the traveller in the
Caucasus, out of temper, as he will often be, with the corruption and stupidity
of all but the highest class of officials, must not forget that, but for their
presence, he would be unable to penetrate at all into the interior of the
country.

Little or nothing has been said in the course of this narrative about the wild
animals to be found in the Caucasus. We met with chamois occasionally, but never
in any great number; we twice saw dead bouquetin, and we noticed the track of
bears in the forest; we also found some cubs in captivity in Suanetian villages,
but this was the sum of the quadrupedal life which came under our eyes. A few
eagles and a great number of cuckoos, vocal despite the lateness of the season,
were the most remarkable members of the feathered tribe which attracted our
observation. Nevertheless, those who may visit the Caucasus for the sake of
sport will probably find it. A sportsman, ambitious of a bullfight, will meet
with a worthy foe in the gigantic ❛auruch,❜ which still haunts the valleys west
of Elbruz, and of which a stuffed specimen may be seen in the museum at Tiflis.

That bears abound is proved by the complaints we heard of their ravages, and by
the frequency of their tracks; chamois and bouquetin must be sufficiently
numerous, if the account given to Herr Radde, by the natives of the upper
Zenes-Squali, of a winter-drive on snowshoes, when thirty-three were slain, may
be believed. In the swamps bordering the rivers that join the Terek, as well as
in the jungle of the Kur, wild boars make their lairs, and the traveller obliged
to spend the night at Mscheti is frequently disturbed by the cries of wolves and
jackals. Pheasants still exist on the banks of their native river, the Phasis,
and are said to be so plentiful on the north of the chain, as to be sold by the
Russian soldiers to their officers for fourteen copecks (or about fivepence) a
brace. Radde gives an account of the snaring of ptarmigan in Suanetia, where
they are found upon the mountain-slopes even in winter. In summer they raise
their broods within the forest boundary.

Much as we wish to persuade travellers, and more especially mountaineers, to
abandon for a season their old Swiss loves, and to start in quest of the fresher
charms of the hitherto-neglected maiden peaks of the Caucasus, we must, in
fairness, point out the principal difficulties that will be met with in such an
enterprise, and how best they may be encountered. For some years to come
travellers in the Caucasus will find letters of introduction to the government
officials a useful, if not essential, part of their outfit. Without them they
may be objects of suspicion, and their purpose in desiring to penetrate the
fastnesses of the mountain-tribes may be misunderstood. Some people say that a
uniform is absolutely necessary in Russia; though this is not the case, those
who hold any position entitling them to wear an official dress will do well to
take it. In the East even more than in the West, and above all among Russian
officials, ❛fine feathers❜ are considered to make ❛fine birds,❜ and even an old
Volunteer tunic would protect its wearer from much rudeness from postmasters and
sub-officials.

The selection of a starting-point will depend upon the tour proposed by the
traveller. Tiflis is far from the mountain-chain, but the fact that there only
can the necessary maps be bought, will induce even those to whom a city
combining, in such a striking manner, the discordant elements of Kuropean and
Asiatic life is not a sufficient attraction, to visit the Trans-Caucasian
capital. Vladikafkaz is the best base for the exploration of the northern
valleys. It is the residence of the commandant of the district,and the
Cis-Caucasian officials appreciate better the aims of an explorer, and are more
practical in the aid they afford him, than those at Tiflis. Kutais is admirably
situated as a starting-point for the Mingrelian valleys, and next year will
probably be brought nearer to the Black Sea coast, by the partial opening of the
Poti-Tiflis Railroad; while Pätigorsk is a convenient Capua, within two days’
ride of the base of Elbruz.

The first necessity for a journey in the mountains is a servant ready to rough
it, and sufficiently conversant with the native dialects to act as interpreter.
A knowledge of cooking, such as our man possessed, is a great additional
recommendation. A light tent and a cooking apparatus are essentials, as well as
the usual requisites for travel in uncivilised countries, which I need not
catalogue here. The difficulties of mountaineering inherent to such a country as
the Caucasus are obvious. The peaks are, generally speaking, extremely
formidable; the natives, except at Uruspieh, are useless above the snow-level,
and it is often impossible to leave luggage at the mercy of villagers while
making an ascent. The climate is changeable, and the rainfall, owing to the
position of the chain between two seas, is frequently excessive. Thus the
impediments to a mountain tour are very serious, though not, in my opinion,
sufficient to counterbalance the advantage and pleasure to be derived from a
journey in a country surpassing, both in freshness, grandeur of natural scenery,
and ethnological interest, any other so accessible to English travellers.

The expedition will, of course, differ much from a run to the Oberland or
Zermatt, and it should be undertaken only by men prepared to face
daily-recurring difficulties with good temper and perseverance. A party of five
or six, accompanied by not less than two firstrate guides, of which two of the
members have botanical or artistic tastes, and would be content to remain below,
or to cross a lower ridge with the luggage, while their friends attacked ❛peaks,
passes, and glaciers,❜ would have the best chance of success; if favoured with
fine weather, and with the help of a Cossack in all dealings with the villagers,
they might effect a great deal.

Before bidding farewell to the Caucasus, I must remove any impression the
previous pages may have given that either Kazbek or Elbruz are in themselves
difficult mountains. First ascents are proverbially the hardest. On Kazbek we
had to contend against severe wind and cold, and total ignorance of the
mountain, which made us go up the wrong way. On Elbruz we encountered a tempest,
which, but for the entire absence of other difficulties, would have rendered the
ascent impossible. On both occasions we might have imagined that we were
wrestling against ❛principalities and powers.❜ The icy wastes of the Caucasus
have been peopled throughout all ages with invisible occupants. In this region
dwelt Gog and Magog; here Oriental fancy has placed the abode of the Deevs, a
race of pre-Adamite monarchs, and the retreat of the Peri and the Genii. It was
to this snowy prison that Solomon consigned the rebel Afrites, and it would have
been strange indeed had not the Djin-Padishah, or Ruler of the Spirits, who
dwells on Elbruz, summoned ❛the Prince of the Power of the Air❜ to his aid, to
resist the strange company who, armed with rope and ice-axe, ventured to intrude
on his dominions.

According to their best biographers, giants and gnomes seldom fight a second
time. After their power has been once successfully defied, they either tamely
expire, or retreat to some more remote fortress. The Djin-Padishah has, for the
present, probably taken up his abode on Mount Everest, whence, let us hope, he
may soon be dislodged, and dismissed to the North Pole, or some equally remote
and apparently unattainable spot. But, abandoning allegory, I think we may
fairly assume that, short of actual wet weather, in which no one would attempt a
first-class peak, we encountered, in our own attacks on both Elbruz and Kazbek,
every obstacle that either mountain possesses or can summon to its aid. Any
mountaineers whom this account of our journey may set ❛thinking on the frosty
Caucasus,❜ may rest assured that in fine weather they cannot fail to reach the
summits of both. Few of our followers are likely to rest content with this
measure of success, but, however formidable may be the difficulties to be
overcome in climbing the other great Caucasian peaks, it is something to know
that the two most famous mountains of the chain are within the reach of all
those who possess the physical endurance necessary for an ascent of Mont Blanc.

:::

#### **Annotations** {.break-before .unnumbered}

[^1300]: [Keith Johnston's ❛Dictionary of Geography.❜]{.footnote}

[^1301]: [Travels in Georgia, Persia, and Kurdistan (Wagner, 1856).]{.footnote}

[^1302]: [According to Herr Abich, the snow-limit in Suanetia is 9,500 feet, The same author fixes the limit of the forests at 7,300 feet. Herr Radde, after numerous observations, estimates it at 7,600 feet. The average height of the base of the great glaciers as yet measured is 7,200 feet.]{.footnote}

[^1303]: [Readers who desire further details as to the tribes of the Caucasus, will find them in Wagner's ❛Travels in Persia, Georgia, and Kurdistan,❜ and Haxthausen's ❛Transcaucasia.❜ works translated from the German; or (in French) in Dubois de Montpereux’ ❛Voyage autour du Caucase,❜ and a more recent work, ❛Lettres sur le Caucase.❜ ]{.footnote}

[^1304]: [The Caucasus has in all ages been famed for its variety of languages. Pliny tells us that in Colchis there were more than three hundred tribes speaking different dialects, and that the Romans, in order to carry on any intercourse with the natives, had to employ a hundred and thirty interpreters. This is probably an exaggeration, but there seems no reason to doubt Strabo, who informs us that in his day no less than seventy dialects were spoken in the country, which even now is called ❛the Mountain of Languages.❜ We find archaic forms of various Georgian, Mongolian, Persian, Semitic, and Tatarian languages, as well as anomalous forms of speech, which bear no affinity to any known tongue of Europe or Asia. — See Max Muller's ❛Lectures on Language❜ and Rev. J. Taylor’s ❛Words and Places.❜]{.footnote}

[^1305]: [I am indebted for this quotation to Mr. Usher’s ❛London to Persepolis.❜ ]{.footnote}
