# CHAPTER XIV.<br /><small> TRANSCAUCASIA AND THE CRIMEA: HOME THROUGH RUSSIA. </small>{#fourteen .unnumbered}

::: justified

:::: fs-xs
Borjom — Bad Road — Beautiful Scenery — Achaltzich — Across the Hills —
Abastuman — A Narrow Valley —The Burnt Forest —Panorama of  the Caucasus — Last
Appearance of Kazbek and Elbruz — A Forest Ride — Baglad — Mingrelian
Hospitality — A French Baron's Farm — The Rion Basin —  Kutais — The Postmaster
— Poti — A Dismal Swamp — Soukhoum-Kalé — Sevastopol — The Battlefields — The
Crimean  Corniche — Bakhchi-Sarai — Odessa — A Run Across Russia — A Jew's Cart
— The Dnieper Steam-boat — Kieff — Picturesque Pilgrims — The Lavra — Sainted
Mumies — A Long Drive — Vitebsk — St. Petersburg — Conclusion.
<br /><br />
::::

*August 29—30th.* — We were able to retain the same ❛diligence❜ and conductor we
had brought from Vladikafkaz for our drive to Achaltzich. Having already
traversed the road between Tiflis and Suram, we determined to start in the
afternoon of Saturday, and travel through the night, by which means we hoped to
arrive at Borjom at midday on Sunday. At Mscheti we thought ourselves lucky to
escape with only a couple of hours’ detention; after this all went well, and we
arrived at Suram in time for breakfast. Here we parted from Francois, who was
despatched, with some of the luggage. to make his way in ❛telegas❜ to Kutais, by
the aid of a ❛podorojno❜ and the knowledge of about a dozen words of Russian.

From Suram to Borjom is a distance of eighteen miles, divided into two stages.
Most of the valleys, by which the streams rising in the tablelands of Armenia
force their way northwards, are deep, narrow, tortuous, and well-wooded, and
that of the Kur forms no exception to the general rule. The road, or rather
track (for made road there is none), is wonderfully bad, when one remembers that
it is the only communication between the capital and summer residence of the
Governor of the Caucasus. It climbs up and down steep hills in the most reckless
manner, and if there is one thing more than another its constructors appear to
have aimed at, it is the production of steep pitches with sharp corners at their
feet. After waiting two hours for horses at the roadside shed which serves as
the halfway station, we were given over to the mercies of a bumpkin, who had
apparently never driven anything but a cart, and who was with the greatest
difficulty persuaded to put on the drag in going downhill, even after one of his
horses had fallen.

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption }
![Grand-Ducal Villa at Borjom.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0466.jpg "Grand-Ducal Villa at Borjom."){#b466}
::::

The scenery is exceedingly pretty; the Kur flows in a clear rapid stream along
the bottom of the glen, the sides of which, broken here and there by masses of
crag, are clothed in thick pinewoods. Beside the road grow copses of the wild
rose, which is indigenous to this country. Borjom is situated at the point where
the Kur receives a small tributary flowing from the eastern hills. The
grandducal villa, a modern construction in the chalet style, is on the left bank
of the river; the hills rise immediately behind it, in steep slopes. Borjom
itself is on the further side of the Kur, which is here crossed by a substantial
bridge. The village is of quite modern date, and consists of a few shops and a
number of low cottage residences with large verandahs, in which their occupants
seem to pass the greater portion of their existence. The mineral spring, the
waters of which are of a ferruginous character, bursts out of the ground in a
lateral glen watered by a small stream, and overhung by lofty cliffs. A
bath-house has been built, and the grounds in the neighbourhood laid out in
lawns and garden-walks.

Borjom, owing to its being the chosen retreat of the Grand Duke, has become the
most aristocratic of the Caucasian bathing-places, and a recent Russian writer
goes so far as to call it the Baden-Baden of the East, and to reproach it with
excessive luxury and extravagance, a charge which certainly did not suggest
itself to our minds. We were driven to the front-door of a large building at the
mouth of the ravine in which the source is situated, and had already alighted,
when a domestic stepped forward and informed us that that part of the building
was reserved for ❛les hauts employés,❜ information which did not impress us with
so deep a sense as he seemed to expect of the impropriety of which we had been
guilty. Having been driven round to a side-door, we were allowed to enter, and
shown a large room, ill-provided, as Russian rooms generally are, with sleeping
accommodation, but otherwise comfortable. We spent the evening in sauntering
about the place, which is so overshadowed by trees and rocks that scarcely any
sunshine can reach it — a circumstance which, in the hot climate of Georgia, has
contributed greatly to its reputation as a pleasant summer retreat for those who
do not require any very violent course of mineral waters.

At Pätigorsk at least two-thirds of the society are real invalids; here we saw
scarcely any, and the Russian young ladies who raced about the gardens, and
chatted together in excellent English, afforded a more pleasing spectacle than
the sickly officers and decrepit old men of the CisCaucasian Spa. An excellent
military band, by far the best we heard in the Caucasus, played in the gardens
about sunset, and we had the satisfaction of hearing the ❛Mabel Waltzes❜ (the
popularity of which seems unbounded in Russia) and the overture to ❜The
Huguenots❜ performed in a masterly style. A question seemed likely to arise as
to the possibility of procuring horses in the morning to go on to Achaltzich,
but, owing to an officer for whom some were ordered being unable to start, we
succeeded in getting the requisite number.

*August 31st.* — The first stage is a long one of twenty-six versts (seventeen
miles) and the road is extraordinarily hilly. The morning was lovely, and we
fully enjoyed the pretty scenery of the winding valley, where the Kur flowed
between hillsides clothed with thick oak and fir-forests, from amongst which
rise the ruins of old castles, commanding in former days this entrance to
Georgia. We were reminded at every turn of the Jura, to which, in its relation
to the higher neighbouring chain, the Georgian hill-country may, *mutatis
mutandis*, be very fairly compared. The situation of Atskur, the halfway station
between Borjom and Achaltzich, is extremely picturesque. The houses are grouped
at the base of an abrupt crag, crowned by the extensive remains of an old
Georgian fortress, which commanded alike the entrance to the defile and the
bridge over the Kur. The type of the buildings, and of the men we met on the
road, had already changed; the ❛baschlik❜ and cartridge-breasted coat had
disappeared, and we saw in their place the turbans and dress of a Turkish race.

Atskur marks the limit between the wooded and bare country; beyond it the
landscape became more open, and we found ourselves again in the region of
rolling hills which extends as far as Erivan and Erzeroum. The road was heavy,
and our cattle were weak poor-spirited brutes, though far superior to the
driver, who was the most incompetent man for his post we had yet come across. We
had constantly to get out and wall, and even thus the heavy carriage had several
narrow escapes of rolling back again, horses and all, when halfway up one of the
steep hills which occurred every quarter of a mile. The Kur forces its way
through a narrow cleft in a low range, and the road is carried over the brow.
Above this the valley opens out into a broad cultivated basin, and there is
nothing to attract attention until the green roofs and white walls of the
Russian quarter of Achaltzich come into view. Our carriage might never have
reached it, had not the conductor forced the miserable postilion to dismount,
and himself urged on the horses.

Achaltzich, though not an imposing, is an interesting place; it is situated on
the banks of a tributary of the Kur, which divides it into two quarters, the
Turkish and Russian — the former exactly similar to every other military colony
in the Caucasus; the latter a mass of grey flat-rooted houses, rising tier above
tier against a steep hillside, the top of which, a bold bluff commanding the
valley, is crowned by a fortress. It was to gain possession of this position
that the Turks, under the leadership of a Pasha more brave than prudent, gave
battle to the Russians in the winter of 1853, and suffered a signal defeat, only
prevented from becoming a disastrous rout by the bravery and promptness of some
English officers with the Turkish army, who, by a judicious use of two
field-guns, put a stop to the Russian pursuit.

Immediately south of the town (3,376 feet above the sea), the bare slopes rise
to a rounded summit, 8,402 feet in height. We found sleeping-quarters in a
restaurant, chiefly frequented by Russian officers. Being a saint’s day, the
bazaar was shut up, and, cut off from this source of amusement, we took refuge
in the never-failing public garden and band. Although one of the tracks leading
to Abastuman, a bathing-place in the mountains which divide this district from
the basin of the Rion, is called a post-road, we heard such bad accounts of its
condition that we preferred to dismiss our ❛diligence❜ and procure horses to
take us all the way to Kutais — an additional inducement to this course being
that we were more sure of obtaining the requisite number of animals here than at
Abastuman.

*September 1st.* — It is at Achaltzich that the greater part of the silver
filigree-ware sold in the shops of Tiflis is fabricated, and one of the workmen
brought some of his goods to show us in the morning. They were exceedingly
pretty, and nearly a third less in price than at Tiflis, but there was not so
large a supply to select from. The man with whom we had, without any difficulty,
made a bargain for horses, appeared in due time, and we set out, on some
ungainly but enduring animals, for our ride across the hills to Kutais. The
first day’s journey was to be a very short one. The direct horse-road to
Abastuman crosses the spur on which the fortress is built, turns up into the
hills, and after a long ascent — which in parts reminded us of Syria, except
that the features of the surrounding landscape were on a larger scale — reaches
the top of a wide down, covered with cornfields and dotted with villages, the
inhabitants of which, picturesque Turks dressed in the brightest colours, were
enjoying a midday rest from field labour, clustered in groups, any one of which
would have made the fortune of the artist who faithfully reproduced it.

From the heights we had gained, we looked down on a wide basin of cornland, with
numerous villages, which, by a judicious arrangement of the frontier-line, have
been just included within the Russian Empire. The rounded hills rising beyond it
are in Turkish territory, and a long day’s ride over them would bring the
traveller to the gate of Kars. The view at the present season was very striking;
the valleys and cultivated slopes stood thick with corn, and shone golden in the
cloudless sunshine, and the farspreading downs above them seemed to bask in the
universal blaze of light and heat. We crossed several deep hollows, and passed a
large village surrounded by fruittrees, before descending finally to the banks
of a little stream, just where it issued from the wooded limestone chain. The
road henceforth follows the water through a narrow winding glen, clothed in
firs, where an old castle, perched like an eagle on a lofty crag, looks down on
the passers-by. The scenery is no more than pretty, and its features seemed puny
and tame compared to the wide landscape we had just left.

The bathing village of Abastuman is entered almost before it is seen; it
consists of a row of houses along the roadside, one of which — very unlike most
Russian buildings, and reminding us of a small Swiss inn — serves as an hotel.
We had plenty of time during the afternoon to stroll about the neighbourhood,
and contrast the attractions of Abastuman with those of the other Caucasian
watering-places. Situated in a basin surrounded on all sides by wooded hills,
the place is necessarily without any distant view, and depends on its
home-scenery. The stream is crossed by rustic bridges, and the small arbours,
which crown the rocky points projecting everywhere from the hillsides, give a
cockney air to the place which is the last thing one would expect in so retired
a corner of Asia. Owing to its elevation (4,178 feet above the sea), Abastuman
enjoys a comparatively cool climate during the summer months, when it is much
frequented by the Russian residents both of Kutais and Achaltzich, the latter
town being fearfully hot. It cannot, however, claim to rival Borjom in the rank
and fashion of its visitors, and in one essential attraction it is far inferior.
The band was small and indifferent, but the audience seemed little critical,
and crushed any sense of its deficiencies by dancing vigorously to a sorry
performance of the ❛Guards’ Waltz.❜

*September 3rd.* — The morning was again lovely, a matter of some importance, as
we were about to cross the mountain ridge dividing us from Mingrelia. We set out
at 5 A.M., and rode for several miles through a narrow valley, where the road
constantly crosses and recrosses the stream. There is plenty of wood, but
nothing of a peculiarly large or striking character. Where the two rivulets
forming the sources of the Abastumanska unite their waters, our way strack up
the hillside, and we gained a considerable height, by a long series of zigzags.
A carriage-road over this pass has been traced, and partially cut, from
Achaltzich to the summit, and a little way down the other side. A few bridges
have also been built, but some of them have already been carried away by the
floods. The track, left half finished like most Russian engineering works, is
already falling into disrepair. At its present rate of progress, years must pass
before the arduous work in the long Mingrelian valley of the Chani-Squali is
brought to a termination. Having reached the top of the spur, the road kept
along a tolerably broad ridge between the two glens, affording views, now over
one, now over the other. The eastern basin was the most extensive, and we
continually remarked the admirable grouping and forms of the ridges that
surrounded it. The road passes through an extensive tract of forest desolated by
fire; there are few gloomier sights than a burnt forest, and beyond the crop of
weeds which covered the ground, nature had done nothing to repair the
desolation. The tall charred trunks stood up, brown and leafless, and no younger
trees had as yet sprung up amongst them.

We were glad to reach the point where the ridge merges in the watershed of the
mountains, a few hundred feet below the broad gap which forms the pass. The
forest ceases at about the same level, and the final ascent is by long zigzags
over a grassy slope covered with rank herbage. Passing a solitary house occupied
by several Cossacks, and the ruins of a large encampment used by the detachment
formerly engaged in cutting the road, we pushed eagerly up the crest, anxious to
resolve the question which, since leaving Tiflis, had been a source of alternate
hope and fear — whether we should gain from this point a clear view of the
Caucasian chain. The sky overhead was of unclouded blue, but, knowing how soon
the vapours drawn up by the morning sun from the Mingrelian marshes condense
into clouds, we feared that the mountains might already be partially obscured.
Our delight therefore was unbounded when, as we crested the ridge, not only the
vast basin of the Phasis lay spread beneath, but beyond, and standing out sharp
and clear against the northern horizon, the icy wall of the Central Caucasus met
our eyes, distant at its nearest point eighty-five miles. By following the ridge
a few hundred yards to the west, we gained a brow, whence Kazbek, previously
hidden by a neighbouring eminence, was added to the view, and then sat down to
examine more fully the details of the vast panorama.

The foreground was of exquisite beauty; forested ranges fell gradually from our
feet to the Mingrelian plain, which was flooded by a transparent purple haze. On
the further side an army of green hills clustered round the knees of the snowy
giants of the central chain, which were ranged in line along the horizon.
Directly opposite our viewpoint was the great wall of rock and ice which towers
over the sources of the Ingur, terminated on the west by the graceful snow-cone
of Tau Tötönal. Equidistant from this mass rose, on either hand, the clustered
peaks above Gurschavi, and the solitary Uschba. The latter mountain looked
taller and more terrible than it does even when seen close at hand, where its
gigantic proportions, and the comparative insignificance of its neighbours, are
not so fully revealed. Elbruz, huge and rounded, asserted as usual its
supremacy, at least in height, over all the other summits. Further west there
was only one peak, a remarkable obelisk of rock, which attracted our attention.
In the far east, the snowy sides of Kazbek, bathed in a flood of morning
sunshine, gleamed on us for the last time.

We had before us a panorama, extending over 150 miles, of the Central Caucasus,
Kazbek and Elbruz being each 105 miles distant in a direct line. These figures
give but o weak idea of the extent, and tell nothing of the splendour, of the
glorious vision. To describe it in all its beauty would be impossible, and, even
were it otherwise, fear of disappointing the next traveller, who, having read
these pages, may follow the same path, would make me hesitate in the attempt. In
the first place, few can hope to be favoured with such a day; in the second, the
scene will not produce in every traveller the same feelings that it did in us,
to whom every summit and glacier in the long snowy ridge were full of memories.
The ordinary observer, unused to the scale of great mountain scenery, will see
nothing but curious crags in the huge cliffs of Uschba, and will pass over
without a second glance the strips of glistening silver which seam the
mountain-wall: we, who recognised in one of them the frozen cascade above
Adisch, in another the glacier above Glola, from the icefall of which we had
retreated in despair, lingered to take a long and affectionate farewell of old
friends seen beyond hope once more. Among the numerous Russian officers who had
passed this way with whom we conversed, we did not find one who seemed aware
that the great mountains were visible from the pass, and travellers like them,
incapable of interpreting rightly the images presented to their eyes, will
perhaps accuse us of making an absurd fuss over a distant horizon of snow and a
few jagged rocks, which seem to them rather to spoil the sweep of the skyline.

We paid comparatively little attention, at the time, to the view looking back
into the Turkish territory, but it must not be left wholly unnoticed. There,
beyond the wooded and broken spurs of the chain on which we stood, the highlands
of the province of Kars, a succession of rounded hills, with a few patches of
snow still lingering on their summits, stretched away to the horizon.

A long ride still lay before us — our horsemen urged us onwards, and we were
forded reluctantly to turn away and commence the descent. For some distance the
new road is cut in steep and long zigzags; it plunges almost immediately into a
grove of noble pines and firs, with long mossy streamers hanging from their
branches. The track, reduced to a rough bridle-path, crosses rivulet, and makes
a second and deeper plunge to the bed of the Chani-Squali, the course of which
it follows henceforth to the Mingrelian lowlands. We imagined that we had
already exhausted the charms of sylvan scenery, but the forest in which we now
found ourselves surpassed in the richness and variety of its foliage any we had
yet seen. To enumerate the trees would be not only to exhaust, but to make
several additions to, the list of those found in Central Europe; the beech, the
elm, and the alder, which here grows to an enormous size, were the most
conspicuous. Long wreaths of ivy hung from their branches, and twisted round
their stems, and the ground was covered with a dense undergrowth of box, holly,
laurel, azalea, and rhododendron bushes. Long grasses and ferns, some rising to
the height of a man, filled the glades; others, small and delicate, grew in the
crannies of the mossy cliffs. The stream foamed at the bottom of the deep glen
in a succession of falls and rapids; the path, following and frequently crossing
it, grew worse and worse, and our horses found difficulty in picking their way
along it. A causeway of logs had in many places been laid upon the swampy
ground, and the track, poached into holes between the timbers by the feet of
passing animals, was converted into a succession of ridges and furrows similar
to an American ❛corderoy.❜

We wandered on for some hours through the glades and thickets, halting at times
to admire some exquisite vista, in which the snowy peak of Tau Tötönal, framed
between the green hillsides, seemed to float in blue haze rather than to belong
to earth. The narrow trench gradually expanded, leaving space for occasional
patches of cultivated ground. Cornfields were in time succeeded by plantations
of the tobacco-plant, the bright-green leaves of which are in their natural
state always a pleasing sight. At the corners of many of the enclosures, which
are generally surrounded by rough fences, we noticed raised wooden platforms;
these are said to be look-out posts, where a watchman keeps guard against the
depredations of the bears which abound in the forest. Below the junction of the
two glens the valley widens, and is dotted with numerous clusters of cottages.
Fruit-trees now become plentiful; the plum, the pear, and the medlar grow wild,
and the vine trails its long branches over the forest trees.

The new road was in course of construction, and we found parts in a sufficiently
forward state to enable us to ride along it. The valley, having trended
north-west for some distance, turned due north, and a village stood on the
opposite bank of the stream. From this point, the hills sank rapidly, and our
horsemen pointed out the position of Bagdad in the distance. It was dark, and
the woodcutters’ fires blazed out cheerily, high upon the hillsides, before we
reached our resting-place. Bagdad is situated close to the point at which
several valleys open on to the plain. The village consists of one street, with
houses on either side; there were plenty of people about, but they one and all
refused us shelter for the night; we were getting angry and perplexed at this
final specimen of Mingrelian manners and hospitality, when one of the peasants
suggested that a French baron lived half a mile oft, and that we might find
lodgings with him. We guessed rightly that there could not be two French barons
near Kutais, and that this one must be the Baron de Longueil, whom we had met
six months before on board the Rion steamer. Under the circumstances, the best
course was evidently to accept the proposal, and claim the hospitality of the
only civilised being within reach. Though the Baron was away from home, ❛Madame❜
received us with the greatest kindness, and gave us both food and beds, luxuries
which, ten minutes before, we had seemed little likely to obtain on this side of
Kutais. From the account we heard of it, farming in Mingrelia does not seem to
be so wholly delightful an occupation as the natural fertility of the soil might
lead one to suppose. ❛Madame❜ complained bitterly of the laziness and dishonesty
of the native servants, and of the excessive difficulty of transport, Kutais,
though only about thirty miles distant, being often rendered inaccessible for
weeks in winter by swollen streams and the horrible state of the roads.

*September 4th.* — When daylight came, we saw that the Baron had built himself a
pretty little villa, ornamented with a verandah overgrown with creepers, and
some attempt at a garden. Bidding a grateful adieu to our kind hostess, we
remounted our horses, and started to ride across the flat country that separated
us from Kutais. The sky was overclouded, and we could not but congratulate
ourselves on our good-luck in having had so perfect a view the previous morning.
The road leads at first across glades of turf, and between copses of fruit-trees
overhung and knitted together by wild vines, and passes through several
villages. Mingrelian hamlets are all exactly alike, and it would be impossible
to improve on Mr. Palgrave’s description of one: ❛The houses are neither ranged
in streets, nor grouped in blocks, but scattered as at random, each in a
separate enclosure. The houses themselves are one-storied, and of wood,
sometimes mere huts of wattle and of clay; the enclosures are of cut stakes,
planted and interwoven lattice-wise. Old forest trees, fresh underwood, bramble,
and grass grow everywhere, regardless of the houses, which are in a manner lost
among them; one is at times right in the middle of a village before one has even
an idea of having approached it.❜ On the country roads in the neighbourhood of
Kutais, rude vehicles, half-sledge, half-cart, may frequently be met, drawn by
two oxen, and laden with one of the huge earthenware jars used for storing wine,
which will scarcely fail to recall to the traveller’s mind the story of the
Forty Thieves in the ❛Arabian Nights.❜

:::: { .wrap-70 .caption }
![Mingrelian Wine Jar.](The_Central_Caucasus_and_Bashan_0479.jpg "Mingrelian Wine Jar."){#b479}
::::

For nearly an hour we traversed a thick beechwood, and emerged from it at the
point where it is necessary to ford not only the stream of the Chani-Squali, but
the larger and far more formidable Quirila. Three months earlier we should have
found a new bridge just completed, but after a career of usefulness, short even
for this country, the unhappy structure had been left standing high-and-dry,
while the river flowed in a new channel fifty yards further south. To judge them
by their works, Russian engineers seem incapable of anything thorough, and the
amount of money wasted during the last few years in the Caucasus would be
difficult to calculate. Even the late Czar Nicholas is said to have sighed over
the constant call for fresh grants for the construction of the Dariel road,
which is not finished yet. With more skill and less jobbery a Swiss canton would
have made it in a quarter of the time, and at half the expense it has cost the
Imperial Government.

The Quirila was fortunately not in flood, and we waded without difficulty
through its broad clear-flowing torrent. The hard road into Kutais is half
completed, and follows the left bank of the Rion at no great distance from the
river. The journey divides itself naturally into two stages; the first across
the marshy lowlands, from which a steep bank leads to an upper level covered
with dense oak copses, through which the track runs straight as an arrow for
several miles, until, bending to the left, it descends into Kutais. The first
view of the town from this side, with its large white-walled green-roofed
buildings and domed churches, set in a framework of hills, and watered by the
rapid stream of the Rion, is exceedingly pretty. We trotted through the streets,
and dismounted at the door of the ❛Hotel de France,❜ where we found Francois,
who had arrived safely with the luggage two days previously.

There was some difficulty in finding rooms, for the hotel was crowded; the Grand
Duke Michael, after escorting the Grand Duchess to the seaside, had returned to
Kutais, and set out from thence early on the previous day to ride through the
Radscha and over the Mamisson Pass to Vladikafkaz. Many of the officers, who had
come from country posts to meet him, were still in the place, and there were,
besides, an unusual number of travellers awaiting the departure of the next
steamer from Poti. Amongst them were two gentlemen, who had, like ourselves,
been engaged in exploring the Caucasus— Mons. Favre, the son of the well-known
Genevese geologist, and Mons. Desrolles, an entomologist, whom the natives had
facetiously nicknamed the ❛Father of Flies.❜ The extent of their excursions in
the mountains had been to cross the Mamisson Pass and ride up to Uruspieh, We
also met an English gentleman and his wife, who had made their way across the
Caucasian isthmus from Petrovsk, on the Caspian. The journey from that place to
Vladikafkaz, occupying three days, had to be performed in ❛telegas, ❜ and is one
which few ladies would care to undertake.

*September 5th.* — We discovered during the day two new attractions in Kutais —
its photograph shop, and its jet. We purchased a considerable number of
❛cartes-de-visite❜ of the peasantry of the surrounding districts, executed with
an eye to the picturesque in the grouping and accessories, which did great
credit to the enterprising artist. The jet, which is somewhat softer in
substance and more brittle, but otherwise similar to that sold in England, is
hawked about the streets in long chaplets, and may be bought for very low
prices; we were assured that all the beads are hand-cut. Its native name is
❛gicher,❜ which, in Armenian phrase, also means ❛night.❜

Before leaving Kutais, we had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of Mons.
Khatissian, an Armenian gentleman who has spent much time in exploring the
neighbourhood of Kazbek, and lived for some weeks encamped at the foot of the
Devdorak glacier, engaged in scientific researches, of which he means to publish
the results, accompanied by a map of the glaciers on the eastern flank of the
mountain. Much of the information we derived from him has been embodied in
previous pages.

We had intended to remain two days, and spend the second in an excursion to the
celebrated monastery of Ghelathi, founded at the end of the eleventh century by
a Mingrelian sovereign, which is celebrated alike for the interest of its
architecture, and the venerable images and ecclesiastical wealth it contains. We
heard, however, such disquieting reports of the irregularity of the Sunday
steamer on the Rion, that it seemed more prudent to follow the example of most
of our fellow-travellers, and start twentyfour hours sooner than we had
proposed. To this end an arrangement was concluded with the postmaster, the same
man who had given us trouble on our former visit, by which he undertook to
provide a ❛tarantasse❜ and horses at midnight on Friday — the usual time for
starting, as the accommodation at Orpiri is bad, and the Rion steamer leaves
early in the morning. The money for the horses was paid, and we believed the
affair settled; but at the appointed hour no horses came, and on sending to the
post, we were told that the official had gone off to Orpiri, leaving no
instructions, and that if we wanted horses we must pay over again, and make a
present besides for the favour of having them. The postmaster who had thus
sought to cheat us was described by a gentleman of Kutais as a ❛brigand du
premier ordre,❜ and, unwilling to become his victims, we visited two higher
officials, from one of whom we received an order that horses should be given us
directly, and no further payment asked. Let all travellers beware of that pair
of harpies, the mistress of the ❛Hotel de France,❜ and her friend the postmaster
at Kutais!

We drove to Orpiri in pouring rain. During our voyage down the river, the
weather, though cloudy, was fine — a fortunate circumstance, as, owing to the
shallowness of the water at this season, the ordinary boats cannot get up to
Orpiri, and the passengers and cargo are transferred halfway from one boat to
another. At Poti we went to the ❛Hotel Jacquot,❜ which is clean and comfortable.
No reader of ❛Martin Chuzzlewit❜ could fail to be struck with the resemblance to
Eden of this miserable spot. Its situation, in a swamp rather below the waters
of the Rion, which are only prevented by embankments from sweeping away the
place, combines almost every disqualification for a commercial town. The hotels
(there are three), the office of the steamboat company, and a few houses of the
better sort, are planted at irregular intervals near the quay. Behind them is
the main and only street, which consists of a causeway running between two rows
of log-shanties, raised on piles above pools of fetid water, and ending abruptly
in a dismal swamp. Every road has two large ditches, brimming with stagnant
slime on either side, crossed by little bridges, which, as one of our party
found by unpleasant experience, are easily missed in the dark. What wonder that
fever and ague are written in the faces of the dismal gathering of officers and
employés, to whom, in what the residents are pleased to call a public garden, a
melancholy band nightly discourses doleful tunes! All the real merriment and
music of Poti is confined to the frogs, and they, to judge by the noise they
make, lead a merry life of it. All night long their ceaseless chorus resounds
through the place, and it is asserted by the inhabitants — though I cannot
wholly credit the story — that the sound, when the wind blows that way, is
audible even at Constantinople.

So long as Turkey keeps Batoum, Russia is reduced to make the best of Poti, as
the port of the Caucasus. Soulhoum-Kalé, which seems at first sight
preferable,is little less unhealthy, and is besides rendered difficult of access
from the interior by the numerous streams (of which the Ingur is the largest)
flowing out of the mountains, none of which the Russians have as yet succeeded
in bridging. The future Transcaucasian Railway is to begin at Poti, and
endeavours are being made to deepen the bar of the Rion, and convert its second
mouth into a harbour. Colonel Schauroff, the officer in charge of the works, is
firmly persuaded of the eventual success of the scheme which he has himself
originated, and is endeavouring to execute; but, as is often the case, his
superiors do not share his convictions, and their half-hearted support and
scanty doles are likely to delay indefinitely the completion of the proposed
works.

On the morning of the 6th we made the first break in our party. Francois left us
on board the Batoum steamer to find his way home to Chamonix by Constantinople
and Marseilles. Later in the day we embarked with Paul on board the small but
prettily-fitted boat which was to convey us to Soukhoum-Kalé. The sunset was
fine, but clouds hung over the Caucasian chain, and deprived us of our last
chance of seeing Elbruz, which in clear weather is plainly distinguishable from
shipboard. At daybreak on the 7th we were at anchor in the bay of Soukhoum-Kalé,
alongside the larger steamer to which we were to be transferred for the further
voyage. The town, a small seaport, is situated at the head of a southward-facing
bay; a short distance inland the country rises in graceful wooded hills, but
Soukhoum-Kalé stands on the level marshy shore, and is very unhealthy. Its only
sights are some wonderful weeping-willows in the main street, dignified as a
boulevard, and a botanical garden, or rather plantation of exotic trees. There
was much ripe fruit there — grapes, pears, and plums — well guarded by a sturdy
youth, who assured us they were all reserved for the consumption of a General,
and whom our felonious attacks on his treasures excited to desperation. This
spot witnessed some hard fighting in 1864, when the Abkhasians broke out into
open revolt, overpowered and murdered every man at some of the Russian outposts,
and attacked Soukhoum in force.

Our steamboat, the ❛General Kotzebue,❜ one of the finest in the Black Sea
Company’s fleet, left on the evening of the 7th. All chthonic and the next day
we were running along the Caucasian coast. The shore is lined with grey or white
cliffs, behind which the mountains rise in long wooded ridges broken by valleys,
through which numerous streams find a way down to the sea. Though on the whole
fine, the character of the scenery was not so grand as we had been led to
expect. After a short stay at Novorosiski, an unattractive-looking Russian
colony in a deep bay, we continued our voyage, the coast of the Caucasus
gradually fading in the darkness. During the night we arrived off Kertch, where
the boat remained till midday, allowing time to visit the town, rebuilt since
the war; the museum, the chief treasures of which have been removed to St.
Petersburg, and one of the tumuli in the neighbourhood, containing a curious
stone chamber.

The run from Kertch to Sevastopol occupied twentysix hours, including stoppages
at Theodosia and Yalta. Beyond the latter place the coast-scenery is superb, and
the magnificence of the weather enabled us fully to enjoy it. We had pleasant
and amusing society on board. Besides the travellers whom we met at Kutais,
there were two Russian Generals, types respectively of the two extremes met with
in the Imperial Service; a Georgian youth, splendidly dressed in his full
national costume, and a less showy boy (a son of the Suanetian prince who
murdered the Governor of Mingrelia), both of whom were going to complete their
education at the University of Odessa. On the afternoon of September 10th, after
running across Balaclava Bay, and rounding Cape St. George, we entered the
harbour of Sevastopol, at the mouth of which stands Fort Constantine, looking as
strong as ever, though its southern brother is utterly destroyed. The interior
of the town presents a scene of destruction for which we were quite unprepared.
Not only are the dockyards and government buildings blown to pieces, but the
main street is deserted and grass-grown, and the houses that line it, built of
white stone, stand roofless and shattered wrecks. Nowhere but at Pompeii have I
seen such desolation. The population has fallen from 80,000, before the war, to
8,000; it is now rising again, owing to the recent establishment of the
shipbuilding yards of the ❛Black Sea Steam Navigation Company❜ in the Admiralty
Creek. Their new machinery-sheds, and the adjacent barracks, are the only signs
of life about the place.

We were surprised to find the lines of the Russian defences so perfect; the
lower story of the Malakhoff tower still stands, surrounded by the big ditch and
high mound; the salient angle of the Redan looks fresh and sharp, and a
dismounted cannon lies in one of the embrasures. On the heights outside the
town, the trenches are easily traceable, and at a greater distance, where the
huts stood, the ground is strewn with fragments of broken bottles and old
shoe-leathers. The French dead have been, as far as possible, collected into one
cemetery, which is planted with trees, and placed under the charge of a resident
guardian; but the bodies of our countrymen lie scattered over the downs, in more
than fifty small enclosures, each surrounded by a low wall. At the time of our
visit, these graveyards were covered with a dense growth of weeds, many of the
tombstones were broken and the inscriptions erased, and we saw everywhere proofs
of a carelessness and neglect which are discreditable to the English nation.

The battlefields of Balaclava and Inkerman are marked by simple stone obelisks.
It is difficult to recognise the ❛Valley of Death❜ in a slight depression
between two grassy knolls; the heights of Inkerman are more like what fancy
pictures them, and the ravine up which the Russians came to the assault is
striking, apart from its associations. On a sloping hill, above the forts on the
northern side of the harbour, is the great Russian cemetery. The simple fact,
that from 250 to 300 dead lie under each of the large nameless tombstones that
line the central avenue, gives some idea of the numbers buried there. Prince
Gortschakoff's monument stands at the top of the enclosure; though he survived
the siege for several years, the inscription states that he wished ❛to lie with
those brave companions in arms, by whose valour the enemy was prevented from
penetrating further into fatherland.❜ On the brow above the cemetery, a handsome
memorial chapel has been erected. The building is an attempt, not wholly
successful, to unite a monument and a chapel; externally it has the form of an
irregular pyramid surmounted by a large cross. The interior, a Greek church of
the usual form, is in course of decoration with a series of frescoes by native
and Italian artists, which seemed to us of considerable merit.

English travellers are strangely indifferent to the attractions of the Crimea.
Setting aside for the moment natural beauties, its historical interest well
repays the trouble of a visit. Whatever monuments may be raised elsewhere,
Sevastopol itself will for many years to come remain the greatest memorial of
the struggle which centred round it. Great battles are fought, and little trace
remains; it is in the ruin caused by sieges that war stamps its most lasting
mark. In the bullet-riddled walls of the once handsome buildings, in the
laboriously-wrought labyrinths of lines and counterlines that encompass them, in
the shattered forts and demolished dockyards on the water’s edge, and, more than
all, in the crowded burialgrounds on the heights, it is easy to read the story
of the siege; and, in gazing on them, one is led to appreciate both the
importance of the result, and the cost at which it was obtained.

Travelling in the Crimea is rendered more agreeable than in most parts of Russia
by the excellence of the roads, combined with the civility and promptness met
with at the post-stations. These unusual phenomena are in a great measure due to
the fact, that this is the only district of Russia where pleasure-travellers are
understood, and somewhat also to the pervading influence of the Woronzoff
family, at whose expense the greater part of the coast-road was constructed. It
is a very pleasant drive from Sevastopol to Yalta, Simferopol, Bakhchisarai, and
back. The entire distance can be got over in three days, but five are the least
that should be allowed, as it is desirable to leave time for a visit to the
villas on the coast, and Bakhchisarai and its neighbourhood afford employment
for a long afternoon.

Balaclava is the first post-station. While changing horses we had time to climb
to the old Genoese tower, and look down, on one side on the landlocked creek, on
the other on the iron-bound coast on which the ill-fated ❛Prince❜ struck and
went to pieces. It is after a long inland climb that the road, in a gap between
two wooded hills, reaches the Gate of Baidar, a classical archway built to mark
the spot whence the traveller gains his first, or last, view of the Garden of
the Crimea. From the water’s edge, 1,500 feet below, a long slope of garden,
wood, and vineyard, dotted with villas, runs up to the foot of a tall range of
grey limestone cliffs. The Russian Corniche, as the post-road from this point to
Alushta (a distance of sixty miles) has been aptly called, need not shrink from
comparison with its more famous rival. Few will be found to depreciate the
beauty of a series of landscapes which unite, in constantly-shifting
proportions, the charms of bold rock-scenery and rich vegetation, enhanced, as
far as such scenery can be, by human aid, and set in a frame of blue sky and
still bluer sea. No one who is fortunate enough to travel here in the
vintage-season will despise the merits of the grapes, which are sold at a few
copecks the pound.

Yalta is the Mentone of the coast. Here however, as is generally the case in
Russia, the English rather than the Italian style has been adopted, and the
little town, seen from the sea, with its prim houses and squaretowered church,
reminded us more of the Isle of Wight than of anything on Mediterrancan shores.
The three principal estates are all near Yalta. At Alupka, Prince Woronzoft’s
seat, the house is an odd mixture of the feudal and Saracenic styles, while the
grounds are laid out entirely in the English manner. Orianda, the property of
the Grand Duke Constantine, occupies the finest position, but is the least
interesting; Livadia, the Emperor’s villa, is more in the chalet style, and has
attached to it a chapel, small, but exquisitely decorated. We remarked that the
Czar has some fine watercolour drawings of the Caucasus in his study, the
general fittings of which, as of the rest of the house, are very plain, and,
with the photographs of the Imperial Family hanging on the walls, give an
unexpected but pleasant impression of homeliness, and absence of court
restraint.

The road to Simferopol continues along the coast as far as Alushta — then turns
inland, and crosses a well-wooded ridge of 3,000 feet, a spur of Tchatyr-Dagh
(5,125 feet), the respectable monarch of Crimean heights. Sleeping at
Simferopol, an uninteresting town, we drove on next day to Bakhchisarai,
crossing halfway the brook Alma, considerably above the battlefield. The town,
picturesquely situated in a narrow glen, in the centre of a wide desolate
steppe, is entirely Turkish in character, and forms a striking contrast to the
Russian style of the rest of the Crimea. The principal attraction to visitors
is, however, the residence of the Tartar Khans, used as a hospital during the
war, but which has since been tastefully restored, at the expense of the
Government. It is a very perfect specimen of an Oriental palace, and the
gaily decorated ceilings and brilliant stained-glass make the deserted rooms look
bright and cheerful. A soldier acts as cicerone, but he was so gloriously
intoxicated at the time of our visit, that little information could be got from
him. In the neighbourhood is a curious monastery, hollowed out of the rock, and
a village of Karaite Jews, a sect the origin of which seems doubtful, if not
unknown, and who are accordingly supposed to be a remnant of the lost Ten
Tribes.

We returned to Sevastopol on the 16th, and on the afternoon of the 17th embarked
for Odessa. The steamer, calling at Eupatoria on the way, makes the passage in
twenty hours. At Odessa the Eastern element is altogether wanting, and even the
Russian is unobtrusive; it is, in fact, a Western city. Its character is no
doubt due to its having grown up under the patronage of a French exile, the Duc
de Richelieu, and a Russian Anglo-maniac, Prince Woronzoff. It is at present the
best-paved and best-lighted town in Russia, and boasts a handsome boulevard and
an opera. Its commercial prosperity will no doubt be largely increased by the
opening of railway communication with Moscow.

Situated on the brow of a cliff, and at the edge of a sandy plain, Odessa has
few attractions for the passing traveller, who, as soon as he has sauntered
through the streets, visited one or two churches, the Jewish synagogues, and the
boulevard, will be glad to continue his journey. This, now that the railroads
are finished, will be found no difficult matter, but for us it was different.
The line to Kieff was as yet unopened, and at one time the difficulties of
making our way across Russia to St. Petersburg seemed so great that we had
almost decided to fly to Istamboul and return home by Athens, when a piece of
intelligence, which afterwards proved untrustworthy, made Tucker and myself
revert to our original plan. Moore, however, could not spare longer time, and
left us to cross Europe by a more direct route, by way of Lemberg, Czernowitz,
and Cracow, by which he succeeded in reaching Paris in 6½ days’ hard travelling,
including a detention of twenty-four hours at Czernowitz. Paul also, who had
served us well and faithfully during our Caucasian wanderings, was now
dismissed, to return to his Mingrelian home; thus Tucker and I were left to end
our journey, as we had begun it, by ourselves.

On the evening of the 21st September, we went by rail to Birzoula, where the new
Kieff Line branches off from that to Elizavetgrad; it had been partially opened,
and we had hopes of being forwarded along it, which however proved illusory.
After a vexatious delay of twenty-four hours, we went on again by the Odessa
train, and reached Elizavetgrad on the morning of the 23rd. This part of Russia
consists of nothing but bare rolling downs, on which much of the corn shipped
annually from Odessa is grown; the scenery is consequently very uninteresting
and monotonous. The towns and villages are situated in depressions, watered by
small streams. Elizavetgrad, planted in one of these wrinkles of the steppe, is
a large but unremarkable place, the headquarters of the cavalry in Southern
Russia. We found a man at the railway-station who talked German, and who
undertook to procure a carriage to take us to Krementchuk, eighty miles distant,
where we hoped to catch the Dnieper steamboat on the following morning. A
springless waggon, covered with a tilt, and drawn by four horses, was made
ready, and after a tedious drive of twenty hours, we reached Krementchuk at 8
A.M. on the 23rd, an hour after the time fixed for the steamboat’s departure.
Fortune, however, befriended us for once, and as we drove over the long bridge
of boats, we saw the little steamer still lying beside the wharf, and, urging
our driver to quicken his pace, we made our way through the loose soft sand
which covers the banks, and got on board ten minutes before she started. The
steward and waiter spoke German; the cabin, though very small, was clean, and
the fare good.

The voyage up the Dnieper from Krementchuk to Kieff occupied two days, for we
lay-to at night, owing to the absence of moon, and the difficulty of the
navigation. There is little or no scenery on the river, which for many miles
runs through a level country between low sandy shores; nearer Kieff, the right
bank rises into bold bluffs, crowned Lere and there by the pagoda-like churches
of Russian villages. The river-boats are very picturesque objects, with a tall
tapering mast bearing a huge sail, and a long pennant (generally crimson) flying
from the top. Although on the evening of the second day we caught sight of the
burnished cupola of the Lavra, reflecting the last rays of the setting sun, it
was long after dark before we passed under the central span of the great
suspension-bridge, and anchored alongside the busy quay of the Podole, or lower
town of Kieff. A ❛droschky❜ soon carried us up the steep hill to the upper town,
and after some difficulty in making ourselves understood, we procured rooms in
the ❛Hotel d’Europe.❜

We spent two days in Kieff, which is the most picturesque and one of the most
interesting of the great cities of Russia. The town, built on the top of two
lofty bluffs, commands a wide view of the plains stretching far away eastwards
in the direction of Koursk; as a matter of course the public buildings are
large, the streets wide, and the open spaces numerous. The peculiar character of
the town is due to the multitude of churches with green, gilt, or silvered
cupolas, and the number of trees interspersed amongst the houses. The public
gardens are, for Russia, exceptionally pretty and well-kept; in a dell in their
centre, sheltered by wooded banks, is a large café and pleasure-ground, where
two excellent bands performed in the evening. The cathedral is very old and
curious, containing some fine eleventh-century mosaics and the tomb of Yaroslaf;
but the great attraction to visitors is the famous fortress-convent, or Lavra,
considered the holiest in Russia, to which crowds of pilgrims draw together from
the farthest parts of the Empire. We were lucky in visiting it on a saint’s day,
when every corner was crowded with peasants in the most picturesque costumes —
men in heavy jackboots, bright-coloured shirts fastened in by a belt at the
waist, and low-crowned hats — and girls with gaudy necklaces and wreaths of
paper-flowers round their heads, some of them fresh and pretty-looking, though
all more or less of the flat-faced Russian type.

The churches are gorgeous with silver-plated pictures of saints and jewelled
relics. At the time of our visit a large and excited crowd were pushing and
jostling in the eager struggle to approach and kiss these holy treasures. In the
catacombs, a long series of cellar-like vaults hewn in the rock, a multitude of
saints and pious virgins, each in a separate niche, lie in open coffins robed in
gorgeous silks, the faces veiled, but a shrivelled finger protruding to receive
the kiss of the orthodox. The pilgrims, who accompanied us through the vaults,
laid small offerings on the bodies of their favourite saints, which were
collected by the square-capped monk who brought up the rear of the party.
English visitors are few and far between at the Lavra, and we excited a good
deal of curiosity, though we met with nothing but civility.

Our first enquiries as to the best mode of continuing our journey were met by
the unpleasant news that, only ten days before, the regular ❛diligence❜ service
on all the lines had been suspended, and the post ordered for the future to
travel in ❜telegas.❜ Further researches resulted in the discovery, that St.
Petersburg by way of Vitebsk was more accessible than Moscow by way of Koursk,
the advantage in distance (sixty miles) of the latter being more than
counterbalanced by the better road to Vitebsk. On calling at the carriage
bureau, at the post, we were lucky enough to see a high official, who spoke
excellent French, and was very civil and glad to see us, for he had a lady in
charge desirous of making the same journey. We quickly agreed to take a
❛diligence❜ between us, and start on the morning of Monday the 28th; before the
time came two other people were found to occupy the vacant places. Tucker and I
took the ❛banquette,❜ and with pleasant weather and no dust, the long drive was
by no means disagreeable.

The road was broad and metalled, and the stations, mostly tenanted by Jews,
well-fitted-up, at least compared to those in the Caucasus. Our drivers were a
constant source of amusement. Sometimes a postilion rode one of the leaders,
sometimes two peasants sat side by side on the box — one driving the leaders,
the other the four wheelers, harnessed abreast after the usual Russian fashion;
for two stages only, a man bolder than usual gathered up the mass of reins, and
drove the whole team single-handed. This part of the interior of Russia is not
so ugly as that country is popularly supposed to be: where flat, it is generally
well-wooded with pine and birch, and between Mohilef and Vitebsk, where the
watershed between the Dnieper and Dwina is crossed, the country becomes really
hilly. The autumn tints on the foliage were glorious. We accomplished the 360
miles in seventy hours, and reached Vitebsk early on Thursday morning. There we
came upon one of the yet-unfinished threads of the web of European railways
which will soon spread itself over the whole of Russia. The train carried us in
twenty-four hours to St. Petersburg, where we arrived ten days after leaving
Odessa, having, with the exception of our halts of one day at Birzoula, and two
at Kieff, travelled day and night.

Anything connected with the Caucasus, a country associated in the national mind
with a long and victorious struggle, is sure to attract attention at St.
Petersburg. The notices of our ascents of Kazbek and Elbruz, which had appeared
during the summer in the newspapers, had created considerable interest, and we
received, on our arrival in the capital, many kind invitations, most of which,
owing to the shortness of our stay, we were compelled, much against our wish, to
decline. A matter of more serious regret to us was the miscarriage of an
invitation to be present at preview of the Czarewitch’s regiment of Cossacks,
held in the Great Riding School. We did not receive the Imperial commands until
it was too late to obey them, and were thus deprived of an opportunity of
presenting the Czar with a portion of the highest rock in his European
dominions.

It is now time to cut a long story short. Amongst the sights of Moscow and St.
Petersburg, and on the homeward journey, I need not detain my readers, to whom I
here bid a hearty farewell, trusting that I may persuade some of them to follow
in our footsteps, and to learn for themselves, on the slopes of Elbruz and at
Russian post-stations, the force of Shakspeare’s questions :—

:::: { .margin-left-xl .fs-xs }
| Oh, who can hold a fire in his hand
| By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
| Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
| By bare imagination of a feast?
::::


:::

