# APPENDIX I. <br /><small> THE ELBRUZ EXPEDITION OF 1829. </small>{#fifteen .unnumbered}

:::: align-center
****
::::

::: justified

The Expedition of 1829, led by General Emmanuel, was a sort of
politico-geographical progress through some of the northern valleys of the
Caucasus, with the ultimate object of ascending Elbruz. It was accompanied by
several German savants, one of whom, Herr Kuppfer, has given an account of it in
his ❛Voyage dans les Environs du Mont Elbrouz dans le Caucase,❜ published at St.
Petersburg, 1830.

After experiencing many difficulties on the road, the expedition, escorted by
Cossacks and several cannon, reached in safety the headwaters of the Malka,
8,000 French feet above the sea. On the morning of the 21st July a portion of
the party set out at 10 A.M., and at 4 P.M. attained the edge of the snow, at a
height which they assumed to be not far from 11,000 ft. Here they encamped for
the night, and at 23 the next morning started with some native (Circassian)
mountaineers and a few Cossacks. At first all went smoothly, but as the
steepness of the slopes and the heat of the sun increased, their progress became
more laborious, until — at a point which was determined to be 14,000 French
(14,921 English) feet above the sea, and therefore *really* 3,600 English feet,
though estimated by them to be 1,492 English feet below the summit — M. Kuppfer
and three of his companions fairly knocked up. In spite of this, with strange
looseness of expression, he proceeds to add: ❜However, this first attempt had
succeeded beyond our hopes. On entering the Caucasus we had believed Elbruz
inaccessible, and in a fortnight *we were on its summit.*❜ Meanwhile M. Lenz,
who, accompanied by two Circassians and a Cossack, had preceded his friends, got
as far as the top of a ridge of rocks in the direction of the summit by 1 P.M.,
and *then turned back*, as time ran short and the snow was soft.

While his companions were engaged in assaulting the mountain, General Emmanuel,
seated before his tent in the valley, watched their progress through a
telescope. He suddenly observed a single man far in advance of the rest. We are
rather superfluously informed that the features of the solitary climber were
indistinguishable, but the General could tell from his dress that he was a
Tcherkess. The figure advanced steadily towards a scarped crag, which appeared
from the camp to be the summit, walked round its base, and then vanished behind
the mists which cut off all further view of the mountain.

What he had thus seen satisfied the General that the object of his expedition
was fulfilled, and that the highest summit of Elbruz had been trodden by human
feet. He ordered the news to be proclaimed in camp, and gave notice that the
successful climber should receive the promised reward of 400 roubles as soon as
he appeared to claim it. Few of my readers will be surprised to hear that in the
course of the evening a Tcherkess named Killar presented himself and received
the money.

If, as the loosely-worded narrative seems to show, neither Mons. Lenz nor any of
the German savants saw or heard anything of their more fortunate rival until
they returned to the camp, Killar’s claim to the honour of the first ascent
rests entirely on General Emmanuel’s account of what he saw through his
telescope, under circumstances which render his testimony, to say the least,
very questionable. It is difficult even for practised eyes to distinguish a
solitary man on a snowslope broken by crags 10,000 feet in vertical height above
the observer, and in such cases men often see what they both wish and look for.
Moreover, in the present instance, General Emmanuel’s credit was involved in the
success of an expedition which had been organised with much care and expense,
and he had every motive to make a discovery which would justify him in asserting
officially that the top of Elbruz had been gained by one of the men under his
command. Even Russians treat the official statements of their countrymen with a
certain amount of reserve, and require external confirmation before believing
them. If, however, both the General’s good faith and his telescope are thought
above suspicion, the only fact proved is that a Tcherkess reached the foot of
rocks, which looked from below like the top, and was then lost in clouds.

In default of better evidence we can scarcely be expected to regard Killar as
the Jacques Balmat of Elbruz.


:::

